{"id": "11227", "revid": "17480002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11227", "title": "Freemasonry", "text": "Freemasonry or Masonry consists of fraternal organisations that trace their origins to the local fraternities of stonemasons that from the end of the 14th century regulated the qualifications of stonemasons and their interaction with authorities and clients. Freemasonry has been the subject of numerous conspiracy theories throughout the years. Modern Freemasonry broadly consists of two main recognition groups: \nThe basic, local organisational unit of Freemasonry is the Lodge. These private Lodges are usually supervised at the regional level (usually coterminous with either a state, province, or national border) by a Grand Lodge or Grand Orient. There is no international, worldwide Grand Lodge that supervises all of Freemasonry; each Grand Lodge is independent, and they do not necessarily recognise each other as being legitimate.\nThe degrees of Freemasonry retain the three grades of medieval craft guilds, those of Apprentice, Journeyman or fellow (now called Fellowcraft), and Master Mason. The candidate of these three degrees is progressively taught the meanings of the symbols of Freemasonry and entrusted with grips, signs and words to signify to other members that he has been so initiated. The degrees are part allegorical morality play and part lecture. Three degrees are offered by Craft (or Blue Lodge) Freemasonry, and members of any of these degrees are known as Freemasons or Masons. There are additional degrees, which vary with locality and jurisdiction, and are usually administered by their own bodies (separate from those who administer the Craft degrees).\nMasonic lodge.\nThe Masonic lodge is the basic organisational unit of Freemasonry. The Lodge meets regularly and conducts the usual formal business of any small organisation (approve minutes, elect new members, appoint officers and take their reports, consider correspondence, bills and annual accounts, organise social and charitable events, etc.). In addition to such business, the meeting may perform a ceremony to confer a Masonic degree or receive a lecture, which is usually on some aspect of Masonic history or ritual. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Lodge may hold a formal dinner, or \"festive board\", sometimes involving toasting and song.\nThe bulk of Masonic ritual consists of degree ceremonies conferred in meetings guarded by a \"Tyler\" outside the door with a drawn sword to keep out unqualified intruders to Masonry. (This officer, the Tyler, is necessarily senior because at the door he may hear the highest degree ceremonies, and often a less affluent elderly Mason is offered the office to relieve his need for Masonic company, refreshments and/or fees, without having to pay a subscription. He takes minor parts at the door of all meetings and ceremonies.) Candidates for Freemasonry are progressively \"initiated\" into Freemasonry, first in the degree of Entered Apprentice. At some later time, in separate ceremonies, they will be \"passed\" to the degree of Fellowcraft; and then \"raised\" to the degree of Master Mason. In each of these ceremonies, the candidate must first take the new obligations of the degree, and is then entrusted with secret knowledge including passwords, signs and grips (secret handshakes) confined to his new rank. \nAnother ceremony is the annual installation of the Master of the Lodge and his appointed or elected officers. In some jurisdictions an \"Installed Master\" elected, obligated and invested to preside over a Lodge, is valued as a separate rank with its own secrets and distinctive title and attributes; after each full year in the Chair the Master invests his elected successor and becomes a Past Master with privileges in the Lodge and Grand Lodge. In other jurisdictions, the grade is not recognised, and no inner ceremony conveys new secrets during the installation of a new Master of the Lodge.\nMost Lodges have some sort of social functions, allowing members, their partners and non-Masonic guests to meet openly. Often coupled with these events is the discharge of every Mason's and Lodge's collective obligation to contribute to charity. This occurs at many levels, including in annual dues, subscriptions, fundraising events, Lodges and Grand Lodges. Masons and their charities contribute for the relief of need in many fields, such as education, health and old age.\nPrivate Lodges form the backbone of Freemasonry, with the sole right to elect their own candidates for initiation as Masons or admission as joining Masons, and sometimes with exclusive rights over residents local to their premises. There are non-local Lodges where Masons meet for wider or narrower purposes, such or in association with some hobby, sport, Masonic research, business, profession, regiment or college. The rank of Master Mason also entitles a Freemason to explore Masonry further through other degrees, administered separately from the basic Craft or \"Blue Lodge\" degrees described here, but generally having a similar structure and meetings.\nThere is much diversity and little consistency in Freemasonry, because each Masonic jurisdiction is independent and sets its own rules and procedures while Grand Lodges have limited jurisdiction over their constituent member Lodges, which are ultimately private clubs. The wording of the ritual, the number of officers present, the layout of the meeting room, etc. varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. \nAlmost all officers of a Lodge are elected or appointed annually. Every Masonic Lodge has a Master, two Wardens, a treasurer and a secretary. There is also always a Tyler, or outer guard, outside the door of a working Lodge, who may be paid to secure its privacy. Other offices vary between jurisdictions.\nEach Masonic Lodge exists and operates according to ancient principles known as the \"Landmarks of Freemasonry\", which elude any universally accepted definition.\nJoining a lodge.\nCandidates for Freemasonry will usually have met the most active members of the Lodge they are joining before being elected for initiation. The process varies among Grand Lodges, but in modern times interested people often look up a local Lodge through the Internet and will typically be introduced to a Lodge social function or open evening. The onus is upon candidates to ask to join; while they may be encouraged to ask, they may not be invited. Once the initial inquiry is made, a formal application may be proposed and seconded or announced in open Lodge and a more or less formal interview usually follows. If the candidate wishes to proceed, references are taken up during a period of notice so that members may enquire into the candidate's suitability and discuss it. Finally the Lodge takes an officially secret ballot on each application before a candidate is either initiated or rejected, In UGLE any single member's adverse vote, a \"blackball\" given secretly without stating a reason, or at most two, will suffice to reject a candidate (whereupon their proposer and seconder would be expected to resign from the Lodge).\nA minimum requirement of every body of Freemasons is that each candidate must be \"free and of good repute\". The question of freedom, a standard feudal requirement of mediaeval guilds, is nowadays one of independence: the object is that every Mason should be a proper and responsible person. Thus, each Grand Lodge has a standard minimum age, varying greatly and often subject to dispensation in particular cases. (For example, the Apollo University Lodge at Oxford has always had dispensations to initiate undergraduates below 21, the former English legal age of majority and still the standard UGLE minimum: in the twenty-first century, all university lodges now share this privilege).\nAdditionally, most Grand Lodges require a candidate to declare a belief in a Supreme Being, (although every candidate must interpret this condition in his own way, as all religious discussion is commonly prohibited). In a few cases, the candidate may be required to be of a specific religion. The form of Freemasonry most common in Scandinavia (known as the Swedish Rite), for example, accepts only Christians. At the other end of the spectrum, \"Liberal\" or Continental Freemasonry, exemplified by the Grand Orient de France, does not require a declaration of belief in any deity and accepts atheists (the cause of the distinction from the rest of Freemasonry).\nDuring the ceremony of initiation, the candidate is required to undertake an obligation, swearing on the religious volume sacred to his personal faith to do good as a Mason. In the course of three degrees, Masons will promise to keep the secrets of their degree from lower degrees and outsiders, as far as practicality and the law permit, and to support a fellow Mason in distress. There is formal instruction as to the duties of a Freemason, but on the whole, Freemasons are left to explore the craft in the manner they find most satisfying. Some will simply enjoy the dramatics, or the management and administration of the lodge, others will explore the history, ritual and symbolism of the craft, others will focus their involvement on their Lodge's social side, perhaps in association with other lodges, while still others will concentrate on the lodge's charitable functions.\nOrganisation.\nGrand Lodges.\nGrand Lodges and Grand Orients are independent and sovereign bodies that govern Masonry in a given country, state or geographical area (termed a \"jurisdiction\"). There is no single overarching governing body that presides over worldwide Freemasonry; connections between different jurisdictions depend solely on mutual recognition.\nFreemasonry, as it exists in various forms all over the world, has a membership estimated by the United Grand Lodge of England at around 6\u00a0million worldwide. The fraternity is administratively organised into independent Grand Lodges (or sometimes Grand Orients), each of which governs its own Masonic jurisdiction, which consists of subordinate (or \"constituent\") Lodges. The largest single jurisdiction, in terms of membership, is the United Grand Lodge of England (with a membership estimated at around a quarter million). The Grand Lodge of Scotland and Grand Lodge of Ireland (taken together) have approximately 150,000 members. In the United States, total membership is just under 2\u00a0million.\nRecognition, amity and regularity.\nRelations between Grand Lodges are determined by the concept of \"Recognition\". Each Grand Lodge maintains a list of other Grand Lodges that it recognises. When two Grand Lodges recognise and are in Masonic communication with each other, they are said to be \"in amity\", and the brethren of each may visit each other's Lodges and interact Masonically. When two Grand Lodges are not in amity, inter-visitation is not allowed. There are many reasons one Grand Lodge will withhold or withdraw recognition from another, but the two most common are \"Exclusive Jurisdiction\" and \"Regularity\".\nExclusive Jurisdiction.\nExclusive Jurisdiction is a concept whereby normally only one Grand Lodge will be recognised in any geographical area. If two Grand Lodges claim jurisdiction over the same area, the other Grand Lodges will have to choose between them, and they may not all decide to recognise the same one. (In 1849, for example, the Grand Lodge of New York split into two rival factions, each claiming to be the legitimate Grand Lodge. Other Grand Lodges had to choose between them until the schism was healed). Exclusive Jurisdiction can be waived when the two overlapping Grand Lodges are themselves in Amity and agree to share jurisdiction (for example, since the Grand Lodge of Connecticut is in Amity with the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Connecticut, the principle of Exclusive Jurisdiction does not apply, and other Grand Lodges may recognise both, likewise the five distinct kinds of lodges in Germany have nominally united under one Grand Lodge, in order to obtain international recognition.\nRegularity.\nRegularity is a concept based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, the basic membership requirements, tenets and rituals of the craft. Each Grand Lodge sets its own definition of what these landmarks are, and thus what is Regular and what is Irregular (and the definitions do not necessarily agree between Grand Lodges). Essentially, every Grand Lodge will hold that \"its\" landmarks (its requirements, tenets and rituals) are Regular, and judge other Grand Lodges based on those. If the differences are significant, one Grand Lodge may declare the other \"Irregular\" and withdraw or withhold recognition.\nThe most commonly shared rules for Recognition (based on Regularity) are those given by the United Grand Lodge of England in 1929:\nOther degrees, orders, and bodies.\nBlue Lodges, known as Craft Lodges in the United Kingdom, offer only the three traditional degrees. In most jurisdictions, the rank of past or installed master is also conferred in Blue/Craft Lodges. Master Masons are able to extend their Masonic experience by taking further degrees, in appendant or other bodies whether or not approved by their own Grand Lodge.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a system of 33 degrees, including the three Blue Lodge degrees administered by a local or national Supreme Council. This system is popular in North America, South America and in Continental Europe. In America, the York Rite, with a similar range, administers three orders of Masonry, namely the Royal Arch, Cryptic Masonry, and Knights Templar.\nIn Britain, separate bodies administer each order. Freemasons are encouraged to join the Holy Royal Arch, which is linked to Mark Masonry in Scotland and Ireland, but completely separate in England. In England, the Royal Arch is closely associated with the Craft, automatically having many Grand Officers in common, including H.R.H the Duke of Kent as both Grand Master of the Craft and First Grand Principal of the Royal Arch. The English Knights Templar and Cryptic Masonry share the Mark Grand Lodge offices and staff at Mark Masons Hall.\nIn the Nordic countries, the Swedish Rite is dominant; a variation of it is also used in parts of Germany.\nRitual and symbolism.\nFreemasonry describes itself as a \"beautiful system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols\". The symbolism is mainly, but not exclusively, drawn from the tools of stonemasons \u2013 the square and compasses, the level and plumb rule, the trowel, the rough and smooth ashlars, among others. Moral lessons are attributed to each of these tools, although the assignment is by no means consistent. The meaning of the symbolism is taught and explored through ritual, and in lectures and articles by individual Masons who offer their personal insights and opinions.\nAll Freemasons begin their journey in the \"craft\" by being progressively \"initiated\", \"passed\" and \"raised\" into the three degrees of Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry. During these three rituals, the candidate is progressively taught the Masonic symbols, and entrusted with grips or tokens, signs and words to signify to other Masons which degrees he has taken. The dramatic allegorical ceremonies include explanatory lectures, and revolve around the construction of the Temple of Solomon, and the artistry and death of the chief architect, Hiram Abiff. The degrees are those of \"Entered apprentice\", \"Fellowcraft\" and \"Master Mason\". While many different versions of these rituals exist, with various lodge layouts and versions of the Hiramic legend, each version is recognisable to any Freemason from any jurisdiction.\nIn some jurisdictions, the main themes of each degree are illustrated by tracing boards. These painted depictions of Masonic themes are exhibited in the lodge according to which degree is being worked, and are explained to the candidate to illustrate the legend and symbolism of each degree.\nThe idea of Masonic brotherhood probably descends from a 16th-century legal definition of a \"brother\" as one who has taken an oath of mutual support to another. Accordingly, Masons swear at each degree to keep the contents of that degree secret, and to support and protect their brethren unless they have broken the law. In most Lodges the oath or obligation is taken on a \"Volume of Sacred Law\", whichever book of divine revelation is appropriate to the religious beliefs of the individual brother (usually the Bible in the Anglo-American tradition). In \"Progressive\" continental Freemasonry, books other than scripture are permissible, a cause of rupture between Grand Lodges.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nSince the middle of the 19th century, Masonic historians have sought the origins of the movement in a series of similar documents known as the Old Charges, dating from the Regius Poem in about 1425 to the beginning of the 18th century. Alluding to the membership of a lodge of operative masons, they relate it to a mythologised history of the craft, the duties of its grades, and the manner in which oaths of fidelity are to be taken on joining. The 15th century also sees the first evidence of ceremonial regalia.\nThere is no clear mechanism by which these local trade organisations became today's Masonic Lodges. The earliest rituals and passwords known, from operative lodges around the turn of the 17th\u201318th centuries, show continuity with the rituals developed in the later 18th century by accepted or speculative Masons, as those members who did not practice the physical craft gradually came to be known. The minutes of the Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary's Chapel) No. 1 in Scotland show a continuity from an operative lodge in 1598 to a modern speculative Lodge. It is reputed to be the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world.\nAlternatively, Thomas De Quincey in his work titled \"Rosicrucians and Freemasonry\" put forward the theory that suggested that Freemasonry may have been an outgrowth of Rosicrucianism. The theory had also been postulated in 1803 by German professor; J. G. Buhle.\nThe first Grand Lodge, the Grand Lodge of London and Westminster, later called the Grand Lodge of England (GLE), was founded on St John's Day, 24 June 1717, when four existing London Lodges met for a joint dinner. Many English Lodges joined the new regulatory body, which itself entered a period of self-publicity and expansion. However, many Lodges could not endorse changes that some Lodges of the GLE, which came to be known as Moderns, had made to the ritual, and a few of these formed a rival Grand Lodge on 17 July 1751, which they called the \"Antient Grand Lodge of England.\" These two Grand Lodges vied for supremacy until the Moderns promised to return to the ancient ritual. They united on 27 December 1813 to form the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE).\nThe Grand Lodge of Ireland and the Grand Lodge of Scotland were formed in 1725 and 1736, respectively, although neither persuaded all of the existing lodges in their countries to join for many years.\nNorth America.\nThe earliest known American lodges were in Pennsylvania. The Collector for the port of Pennsylvania, John Moore, wrote of attending lodges there in 1715, two years before the putative formation of the first Grand Lodge in London. The Premier Grand Lodge of England appointed a Provincial Grand Master for North America in 1731, based in Pennsylvania, leading to the creation of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.\nIn Canada, Erasmus James Philipps became a Freemason while working on a commission to resolve boundaries in New England and, in 1739, he became provincial Grand Master for Nova Scotia; Philipps founded the first Masonic lodge in Canada at Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia.\nOther lodges in the colony of Pennsylvania obtained authorisations from the later Antient Grand Lodge of England, the Grand Lodge of Scotland, and the Grand Lodge of Ireland, which was particularly well represented in the travelling lodges of the British Army. Many lodges came into existence with no warrant from any Grand Lodge, applying and paying for their authorisation only after they were confident of their own survival.\nAfter the American Revolution, independent U.S. Grand Lodges developed within each state. Some thought was briefly given to organising an overarching \"Grand Lodge of the United States,\" with George Washington, who was a member of a Virginian lodge, as the first Grand Master, but the idea was short-lived. The various state Grand Lodges did not wish to diminish their own authority by agreeing to such a body.\nJamaican Freemasonry.\nFreemasonry was imported to Jamaica by British immigrants who colonized the island for over 300 years. In 1908, there were eleven recorded Masonic Lodges, which included three Grand Lodges, two Craft Lodges, and two Rose Croix Chapters. During slavery, the Lodges were open to all \"freeborn\" men. According to the Jamaican 1834 census, that potentially included 5,000 free black men and 40,000 free coloureds (mixed-race). After the full abolition of slavery in 1838, the Lodges were open to all Jamaican men of any race. Jamaica also kept close relationships with Masons from other countries. Jamaican Freemasonry historian Jackie Ranston, noted that:\nOn 25 May 2017, Masons around the world celebrated the 300th anniversary of the fraternity. Jamaica hosted one of the regional gatherings for this celebration.\nPrince Hall Freemasonry.\nPrince Hall Freemasonry exists because of the refusal of early American lodges to admit African Americans. In 1775, an African American named Prince Hall, along with 14 other African-American men, was initiated into a British military lodge with a warrant from the Grand Lodge of Ireland, having failed to obtain admission from the other lodges in Boston. When the British military Lodge left North America after the end of the Revolution, those 15 men were given the authority to meet as a Lodge, but not to initiate Masons. In 1784, these individuals obtained a Warrant from the Premier Grand Lodge of England (GLE) and formed African Lodge, Number 459. When the UGLE was formed in 1813, all U.S.-based Lodges were stricken from their rolls\u00a0\u2013 largely because of the War of 1812. Thus, separated from both UGLE and any concordantly recognised U.S. Grand Lodge, African Lodge retitled itself as the African Lodge, Number 1\u00a0\u2013 and became a \"de facto\" Grand Lodge. (This lodge is not to be confused with the various Grand Lodges in Africa.) As with the rest of U.S. Freemasonry, Prince Hall Freemasonry soon grew and organised on a Grand Lodge system for each state.\nWidespread racial segregation in 19th- and early 20th-century North America made it difficult for African Americans to join Lodges outside of Prince Hall jurisdictions\u00a0\u2013 and impossible for inter-jurisdiction recognition between the parallel U.S. Masonic authorities. By the 1980s, such discrimination was a thing of the past. Today most U.S. Grand Lodges recognise their Prince Hall counterparts, and the authorities of both traditions are working towards full recognition. The United Grand Lodge of England has no problem with recognising Prince Hall Grand Lodges. While celebrating their heritage as lodges of African-Americans, Prince Hall is open to all men regardless of race or religion.\nEmergence of Continental Freemasonry.\nEnglish Freemasonry spread to France in the 1720s, first as lodges of expatriates and exiled Jacobites, and then as distinctively French lodges that still follow the ritual of the Moderns. From France and England, Freemasonry spread to most of Continental Europe during the course of the 18th century. The Grande Loge de France formed under the Grand Mastership of the Duke of Clermont, who exercised only nominal authority. His successor, the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, reconstituted the central body as the Grand Orient de France in 1773. Briefly eclipsed during the French Revolution, French Freemasonry continued to grow in the next century, at first under the leadership of Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse, Comte de Grassy-Tilly. A career Army officer, he lived with his family in Charleston, South Carolina from 1793 to the early 1800s, after leaving Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, during the years of the Haitian Revolution.\nSchism.\nThe ritual form on which the Grand Orient of France was based was abolished in England in the events leading to the formation of the United Grand Lodge of England in 1813. However the two jurisdictions continued in amity, or mutual recognition, until events of the 1860s and 1870s drove a seemingly permanent wedge between them. In 1868 the \"Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of the State of Louisiana\" appeared in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana, recognised by the Grand Orient de France, but regarded by the older body as an invasion of their jurisdiction. The new Scottish Rite body admitted blacks. The resolution of the Grand Orient the following year that neither colour, race, nor religion could disqualify a man from Masonry prompted the Grand Lodge to withdraw recognition, and it persuaded other American Grand Lodges to do the same.\nA dispute during the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875 prompted the Grand Orient de France to commission a report by a Protestant pastor, which concluded that, as Freemasonry was not a religion, it should not require a religious belief. The new constitutions read, \"Its principles are absolute liberty of conscience and human solidarity\", the existence of God and the immortality of the soul being struck out. It is possible that the immediate objections of the United Grand Lodge of England were at least partly motivated by the political tension between France and Britain at the time. The result was the withdrawal of recognition of the Grand Orient of France by the United Grand Lodge of England, a situation that continues today.\nNot all French lodges agreed with the new wording. In 1894, lodges favouring the compulsory recognition of the Great Architect of the Universe formed the Grande Loge de France. In 1913, the United Grand Lodge of England recognised a new Grand Lodge of Regular Freemasons, a Grand Lodge that follows a similar rite to Anglo-American Freemasonry with a mandatory belief in a deity.\nThere are now three strands of Freemasonry in France, which extend into the rest of Continental Europe:-\nThe term Continental Freemasonry was used in Mackey's 1873 \"Encyclopedia of Freemasonry\" to \"designate the Lodges on the Continent of Europe which retain many usages which have either been abandoned by, or never were observed in, the Lodges of England, Ireland, and Scotland, as well as the United States of America\". Today, it is frequently used to refer to only the Liberal jurisdictions typified by the Grand Orient de France.\nThe majority of Freemasonry considers the Liberal (Continental) strand to be Irregular, and thus withhold recognition. The Continental lodges, however, did not want to sever masonic ties. In 1961, an umbrella organisation, Centre de Liaison et d'Information des Puissances ma\u00e7onniques Signataires de l'Appel de Strasbourg (CLIPSAS) was set up, which today provides a forum for most of these Grand Lodges and Grand Orients worldwide. Included in the list of over 70 Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are representatives of all three of the above categories, including mixed and women's organisations. The United Grand Lodge of England does not communicate with any of these jurisdictions, and expects its allies to follow suit. This creates the distinction between Anglo-American and Continental Freemasonry.\nItaly.\nIn the early 20th century Freemasonry was an influential semi-secret force in Italian politics with a strong presence among professionals and the middle class across Italy, as well as among the leadership of the parliament, public administration, and the army. The two main organisations were the Grand Orient and the Grand Lodge of Italy. They had 25,000 members in 500 or more lodges. Freemasons took on the challenge of mobilizing the press, public opinion and the leading political parties in support of Italy's joining the Allies of the First World War in 1914\u20131915. Traditionally, they promoted Italian nationalism focused on unification, and undermining the power of the Catholic Church. In 1914-15 they dropped the traditional pacifistic rhetoric and used instead the powerful language of Italian nationalism. Freemasonry had always promoted cosmopolitan universal values, and by 1917 onwards they demanded a League of Nations to promote a new post-war universal order based upon the peaceful coexistence of independent and democratic nations.\nFreemasonry and women.\nThe status of women in the old guilds and corporations of medieval masons remains uncertain. The principle of \"femme sole\" allowed a widow to continue the trade of her husband, but its application had wide local variations, such as full membership of a trade body or limited trade by deputation or approved members of that body. In masonry, the small available evidence points to the less empowered end of the scale.\nAt the dawn of the Grand Lodge era, during the 1720s, James Anderson composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons, the basis for most subsequent constitutions, which specifically excluded women from Freemasonry. As Freemasonry spread, women began to be added to the Lodges of Adoption by their husbands who were continental masons, which worked three degrees with the same names as the men's but different content. The French officially abandoned the experiment in the early 19th century. Later organisations with a similar aim emerged in the United States, but distinguished the names of the degrees from those of male masonry.\nMaria Deraismes was initiated into Freemasonry in 1882, then resigned to allow her lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge. Having failed to achieve acceptance from any masonic governing body, she and Georges Martin started a mixed masonic lodge that worked masonic ritual. Annie Besant spread the phenomenon to the English-speaking world. Disagreements over ritual led to the formation of exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England, which spread to other countries. Meanwhile, the French had re-invented Adoption as an all-female lodge in 1901, only to cast it aside again in 1935. The lodges, however, continued to meet, which gave rise, in 1959, to a body of women practising continental Freemasonry.\nIn general, Continental Freemasonry is sympathetic to Freemasonry amongst women, dating from the 1890s when French lodges assisted the emergent co-masonic movement by promoting enough of their members to the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite to allow them, in 1899, to form their own grand council, recognised by the other Continental Grand Councils of that Rite. The United Grand Lodge of England issued a statement in 1999 recognising the two women's grand lodges there to be regular in all but the participants. While they were not, therefore, recognised as regular, they were part of Freemasonry \"in general\". The attitude of most regular Anglo-American grand lodges remains that women Freemasons are not legitimate Masons.\nIn 2018 guidance was released by the United Grand Lodge of England stating that, in regard to transgender women, \"A Freemason who after initiation ceases to be a man does not cease to be a Freemason\". The guidance also states that transgender men are allowed to apply to become Freemasons.\nAnti-Masonry.\n\"Anti-Masonry\" (alternatively called \"Anti-Freemasonry\") has been defined as \"opposition to Freemasonry\", but there is no homogeneous anti-Masonic movement. Anti-Masonry consists of widely differing criticisms from diverse (and often incompatible) groups who are hostile to Freemasonry in some form. Critics have included religious groups, political groups, and conspiracy theorists, in particular, those espousing Masonic conspiracy theories or the Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory. Certain prominent Anti-Masons, such as Nesta Helen Webster (1876 \u2013 1960), have exclusively criticized \"Continental Masonry\" while considering \"Regular Masonry\" an honorable association.\nThere have been many disclosures and expos\u00e9s dating as far back as the 18th century. These often lack context, may be outdated for various reasons, or could be outright hoaxes on the part of the author, as in the case of the Taxil hoax.\nThese hoaxes and expos\u00e9s have often become the basis for criticism of Masonry, often religious or political in nature or are based on suspicion of corrupt conspiracy of some form. The political opposition that arose after the American \"Morgan Affair\" in 1826 gave rise to the term \"Anti-Masonry\", which is still in use in America today, both by Masons in referring to their critics and as a self-descriptor by the critics themselves.\nReligious opposition.\nFreemasonry has attracted criticism from theocratic states and organised religions for supposed competition with religion, or supposed heterodoxy within the fraternity itself and has long been the target of conspiracy theories, which assert Freemasonry to be an occult and evil power.\nChristianity and Freemasonry.\nAlthough members of various faiths cite objections, certain Christian denominations have had high-profile negative attitudes to Masonry, banning or discouraging their members from being Freemasons.\nThe denomination with the longest history of objection to Freemasonry is the Catholic Church. The objections raised by the Catholic Church are based on the allegation that Masonry teaches a naturalistic deistic religion which is in conflict with Church doctrine. A number of Papal pronouncements have been issued against Freemasonry. The first was Pope Clement XII's \"In eminenti apostolatus,\" 28 April 1738; the most recent was Pope Leo XIII's \"Ab apostolici,\" 15 October 1890. The \"1917 Code of Canon Law\" explicitly declared that joining Freemasonry entailed automatic excommunication, and banned books favouring Freemasonry.\nIn 1983, the Church issued a new code of canon law. Unlike its predecessor, the \"1983 Code of Canon Law\" did not explicitly name Masonic orders among the secret societies it condemns. It states: \"A person who joins an association which plots against the Church is to be punished with a just penalty; one who promotes or takes office in such an association is to be punished with an interdict.\" This named omission of Masonic orders caused both Catholics and Freemasons to believe that the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons may have been lifted, especially after the perceived liberalisation of Vatican II. However, the matter was clarified when Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI), as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, issued a Declaration on Masonic Associations, which states: \"...\u00a0the Church's negative judgment in regard to Masonic association remains unchanged since their principles have always been considered irreconcilable with the doctrine of the Church and therefore membership in them remains forbidden. The faithful who enrol in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion.\" For its part, Freemasonry has never objected to Catholics joining their fraternity. Those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE deny the Church's claims. The UGLE now states that \"Freemasonry does not seek to replace a Mason's religion or provide a substitute for it.\"\nIn contrast to Catholic allegations of rationalism and naturalism, Protestant objections are more likely to be based on allegations of mysticism, occultism, and even Satanism. Masonic scholar Albert Pike is often quoted (in some cases misquoted) by Protestant anti-Masons as an authority for the position of Masonry on these issues. However, Pike, although undoubtedly learned, was not a spokesman for Freemasonry and was also controversial among Freemasons in general. His writings represented his personal opinion only, and furthermore an opinion grounded in the attitudes and understandings of late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the US. Notably, his book carries in the preface a form of disclaimer from his own Grand Lodge. No one voice has ever spoken for the whole of Freemasonry.\nFree Methodist Church founder B.T. Roberts was a vocal opponent of Freemasonry in the mid 19th century. Roberts opposed the society on moral grounds and stated, \"The god of the lodge is not the God of the Bible.\" Roberts believed Freemasonry was a \"mystery\" or \"alternate\" religion and encouraged his church not to support ministers who were Freemasons. Freedom from secret societies is one of the \"frees\" upon which the Free Methodist Church was founded.\nSince the founding of Freemasonry, many Bishops of the Church of England have been Freemasons, such as Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher. In the past, few members of the Church of England would have seen any incongruity in concurrently adhering to Anglican Christianity and practising Freemasonry. In recent decades, however, reservations about Freemasonry have increased within Anglicanism, perhaps due to the increasing prominence of the evangelical wing of the church. The former archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams, appeared to harbour some reservations about Masonic ritual, whilst being anxious to avoid causing offence to Freemasons inside and outside the Church of England. In 2003 he felt it necessary to apologise to British Freemasons after he said that their beliefs were incompatible with Christianity and that he had barred the appointment of Freemasons to senior posts in his diocese when he was Bishop of Monmouth.\nIn 1933, the Orthodox Church of Greece officially declared that being a Freemason constitutes an act of apostasy and thus, until he repents, the person involved with Freemasonry cannot partake of the Eucharist. This has been generally affirmed throughout the whole Eastern Orthodox Church. The Orthodox critique of Freemasonry agrees with both the Catholic and Protestant versions: \"Freemasonry cannot be at all compatible with Christianity as far as it is a secret organisation, acting and teaching in mystery and secret and deifying rationalism.\"\nRegular Freemasonry has traditionally not responded to these claims, beyond the often repeated statement that those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE explicitly adhere to the principle that \"Freemasonry is not a religion, nor a substitute for religion. There is no separate 'Masonic deity,' and there is no separate proper name for a deity in Freemasonry.\"\nChristian men, who were discouraged from joining the Freemasons by their Churches or who wanted a more religiocentric society, joined similar fraternal organisations, such as the Knights of Columbus for Catholic Christians, and the Loyal Orange Institution for Protestant Christians, although these fraternal organisations have been \"organized in part on the style of and use many symbols of Freemasonry\".\nThere are some elements of Freemasonry within the temple rituals of Mormonism.\nIslam and Freemasonry.\nMany Islamic anti-Masonic arguments are closely tied to both antisemitism and Anti-Zionism, though other criticisms are made such as linking Freemasonry to Al-Masih ad-Dajjal (the false Messiah in Islamic Scripture). Some Muslim anti-Masons argue that Freemasonry promotes the interests of the Jews around the world and that one of its aims is to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque in order to rebuild the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem. In article 28 of its Covenant, Hamas states that Freemasonry, Rotary, and other similar groups \"work in the interest of Zionism and according to its instructions ...\"\nMany countries with a majority Muslim population do not allow Masonic establishments within their borders. However, countries such as Turkey and Morocco have established Grand Lodges, while in countries such as Malaysia and Lebanon there are District Grand Lodges operating under a warrant from an established Grand Lodge.\nIn Pakistan in 1972, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, placed a ban on Freemasonry. Lodge buildings were confiscated by the government.\nMasonic lodges existed in Iraq as early as 1917, when the first lodge under the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE) was opened. Nine lodges under UGLE existed by the 1950s, and a Scottish lodge was formed in 1923. However, the position changed following the revolution, and all lodges were forced to close in 1965. This position was later reinforced under Saddam Hussein; the death penalty was \"prescribed\" for those who \"promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations.\"\nPolitical opposition.\nIn 1799, English Freemasonry almost came to a halt due to Parliamentary proclamation. In the wake of the French Revolution, the Unlawful Societies Act banned any meetings of groups that required their members to take an oath or obligation.\nThe Grand Masters of both the Moderns and the Antients Grand Lodges called on Prime Minister William Pitt (who was not a Freemason) and explained to him that Freemasonry was a supporter of the law and lawfully constituted authority and was much involved in charitable work. As a result, Freemasonry was specifically exempted from the terms of the Act, provided that each private lodge's Secretary placed with the local \"Clerk of the Peace\" a list of the members of his lodge once a year. This continued until 1967, when the obligation of the provision was rescinded by Parliament.\nFreemasonry in the United States faced political pressure following the 1826 kidnapping of William Morgan by Freemasons and his subsequent disappearance. Reports of the \"Morgan Affair\", together with opposition to Jacksonian democracy (Andrew Jackson was a prominent Mason), helped fuel an Anti-Masonic movement. The short-lived Anti-Masonic Party was formed, which fielded candidates for the presidential elections of 1828 and 1832.\nIn Italy, Freemasonry has become linked to a scandal concerning the Propaganda Due lodge (a.k.a. P2). This lodge was chartered by the Grande Oriente d'Italia in 1877, as a lodge for visiting Masons unable to attend their own lodges. Under Licio Gelli's leadership, in the late 1970s, P2 became involved in the financial scandals that nearly bankrupted the Vatican Bank. However, by this time the lodge was operating independently and irregularly, as the Grand Orient had revoked its charter and expelled Gelli in 1976.\nConspiracy theorists have long associated Freemasonry with the New World Order and the Illuminati, and state that Freemasonry as an organisation is either bent on world domination or already secretly in control of world politics. Historically Freemasonry has attracted criticism, and suppression from both the politically far right (e.g., Nazi Germany) and the far left (e.g. the former Communist states in Eastern Europe).\nFreemasonry is viewed with distrust even in some modern democracies. In the UK, Masons working in the justice system, such as judges and police officers, were from 1999 to 2009 required to disclose their membership. While a parliamentary inquiry found that there had been no evidence of wrongdoing, the government believed that Masons' potential loyalties to support fellow Masons should be transparent to the public. The policy of requiring a declaration of masonic membership by applicants for judicial office (judges and magistrates) was ended in 2009 by Justice Secretary Jack Straw (who had initiated the requirement in the 1990s). Straw stated that the rule was considered disproportionate, since no impropriety or malpractice had been shown as a result of judges being Freemasons.\nFreemasonry is both successful and controversial in France. As of the early 21st century, membership is rising, but reporting of it in popular media is often negative.\nIn some countries anti-Masonry is often related to antisemitism and anti-Zionism. For example, in 1980, the Iraqi legal and penal code was changed by Saddam Hussein's ruling Ba'ath Party, making it a felony to \"promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including Freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations\". Professor Andrew Prescott of the University of Sheffield writes: \"Since at least the time of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, antisemitism has gone hand in hand with anti-masonry, so it is not surprising that allegations that 11 September was a Zionist plot have been accompanied by suggestions that the attacks were inspired by a masonic world order\".\nThe Holocaust.\nThe preserved records of the \"Reichssicherheitshauptamt\" (the Reich Security Main Office) show the persecution of Freemasons during the Holocaust. RSHA Amt VII (Written Records), overseen by Professor Franz Six, was responsible for \"ideological\" tasks, by which was meant the creation of antisemitic and anti-Masonic propaganda. While the number of victims is not accurately known, historians estimate that between 80,000 and 200,000 Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime. Masonic concentration camp inmates were classified as political prisoners and wore an inverted red triangle. Hitler believed Freemasons had succumbed to Jews conspiring against Germany.\nThe small blue forget-me-not flower was first used by the Grand Lodge \"Zur Sonne\" in 1926, as a Masonic emblem at the annual convention in Bremen, Germany. In 1938, a forget-me-not badge, made by the same factory as the Masonic badge, was chosen for the Nazi Party's \"Winterhilfswerk\", the annual charity drive of the National Socialist People's Welfare (the welfare branch of the Nazi party). This coincidence enabled Freemasons to wear the forget-me-not badge as a secret sign of membership.\nAfter World War II, the forget-me-not flower was used again as a Masonic emblem in 1948 at the first Annual Convention of the United Grand Lodges of Germany in 1948. The badge is now sometimes worn in the coat lapel by Freemasons around the world to remember all who suffered in the name of Freemasonry, especially those during the Nazi era."}
{"id": "11228", "revid": "1010228587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11228", "title": "Fulham F.C.", "text": "Fulham Football Club is an English professional association football club based in Fulham, London. They currently compete in the Premier League, the highest level of the English football league system. Founded in 1879, they are London's oldest football club playing professionally.\nThe club has spent 27 seasons in English football's top division, the majority of which have come in two periods during the 1960s and 2000s. The latter period was associated with former chairman Mohamed Al-Fayed, after the club had climbed up from the fourth tier in the 1990s. Fulham have reached two major finals: in 1975 they lost 2\u20130 against West Ham United in the FA Cup Final as a Second Division team, and in 2010 they played Atl\u00e9tico Madrid in the UEFA Europa League Final, losing 2\u20131 after extra time.\nFulham's main rivalries are with fellow West London clubs Chelsea, Queens Park Rangers and Brentford. The club adopted a white shirt and black shorts as its kit in 1903, which has been used ever since.\nHistory.\n1879\u20131907: Formation and Southern League years.\nFulham were formed in 1879 as Fulham St Andrew's Church Sunday School F.C., founded by worshipers (mostly adept at cricket) at the Church of England on Star Road, West Kensington (St Andrew's, Fulham Fields). Fulham's mother church still stands today with a plaque commemorating the team's foundation. They won the West London Amateur Cup in 1887 and, having shortened the name from Fulham St Andrews to its present form in December 1888, they then won the West London League in 1893 at the first attempt. One of the club's first ever kits was half red, half white shirts with white shorts worn in the 1886\u201387 season. Fulham started playing at their current ground at Craven Cottage in 1896, their first game against now defunct rivals Minerva. Fulham are one of the oldest established clubs in southern England currently playing professional football, though there are many non-league sides like Kent side Cray Wanderers who are several decades older.\nThe club gained professional status on 12 December 1898, the same year that they were admitted into the Southern League's Second Division. They were the third club from London to turn professional, following Arsenal, then named Royal Arsenal 1891, and Millwall in 1893. They adopted a red and white kit during the 1896-97 season. In 1902\u201303, the club won promotion from this division, entering the Southern League First Division. The club's first recorded all-white club kit came in 1903, and ever since then the club has been playing in all-white shirts and black shorts, with socks going through various evolutions of black and/or white, but are now normally white-only. The club won the Southern League twice, in 1905\u201306 and 1906\u201307.\n1907\u20131949: Football League.\nFulham joined The Football League after the second of their Southern League triumphs. The club's first league game, playing in the Second Division's 1907\u201308 season, saw them lose 1\u20130 at home to Hull City in September 1907. The first win came a few days later at Derby County's Baseball Ground by a score line of 1\u20130. Fulham finished the season three points short of promotion in fourth place. The club progressed all the way to the semi-final of that season's FA Cup, a run that included an 8\u20133 away win at Luton Town. In the semi-final, however, they were heavily beaten, 6\u20130, by Newcastle United. This is still a record loss for an FA Cup semi-final game. Two years later, the club won the London Challenge Cup in the 1909\u201310 season. Fulham's first season in Division Two turned out to be the highest that the club would finish for 21 years, until in 1927\u201328 when the club were relegated to the 3rd Division South, created in 1920. Hussein Hegazi, an Egyptian forward, was one of the first non-British players to appear in The Football League, though he only played one game for Fulham in 1911, marked with a goal, afterwards playing for non-league Dulwich Hamlet.\nDuring this period, businessman and politician Henry Norris was the club chairman and curiously he had an indirect role in the foundation of Fulham's local rivals Chelsea. When he rejected an offer from businessman Gus Mears to move Fulham to land where the present-day Chelsea stadium Stamford Bridge is situated, Mears decided to create his own team to occupy the ground. In 1910, Norris started to combine his role at Fulham with the chairmanship of Arsenal. Fulham became the first British team to sell hot dogs at their ground in 1926. Fulham had several high-profile international players during the 1920s, including Len Oliver and Albert Barrett.\nAfter finishing fifth, seventh and ninth (out of 22 teams) in their first three seasons in the Third Division South, Fulham won the division in the 1931\u201332 season. In doing so they beat Torquay United 10\u20132, won 24 out of 42 games and scored 111 goals, thus being promoted back to the Second Division. The next season they missed out on a second consecutive promotion, finishing third behind Tottenham Hotspur and Stoke City. A mixed bag of league performances followed, although the club also reached another FA Cup semi-final during the 1935\u201336 season. Fulham were also to draw with Austria in 1936 before Anschluss. On 8 October 1938, Craven Cottage saw its all-time highest attendance at a match against Millwall, with a crowd of 49,335 watching the game.\nLeague and cup football were severely disrupted by the outbreak of World War II in 1939, with the Football League split into regional divisions temporarily, with a national Football League War Cup and a London War Cup up for grabs. Craven Cottage was used like many grounds for fitness and training of the army youth reserves. Post-war, a full league programme was only restored for 1946\u201347. In the third season of what is now considered the modern era of football, Fulham finished top of the Second Division, with a win-loss-draw record of 24\u20139\u20139 (identical to that which won them the Third Division South 17 years previously). John Fox Watson made a pioneering transfer to Real Madrid in 1948, becoming one of the first players from the United Kingdom to sign for a high-profile side abroad.\n1949\u20131970: First Division Cottagers.\nPromotion to the top tier of English football saw the club perform poorly, finishing 17th in their first year and 18th in their second. In only their third season of First Division football, Fulham finished rock bottom of the 22-team league in the 1951\u201352 season, winning only eight of 42 games. On 20 May 1951, Fulham played one of their first ever games in North America in an exhibition match against Celtic at Delorimier Stadium in Montreal in front of 29,000 spectators.\nPossibly the single most influential character in Fulham's history is Johnny Haynes. \"Mr. Fulham\" or \"The Maestro,\" as Haynes later came to be known, signed for The Cottagers as a schoolboy in 1950, making his first team debut on Boxing Day against Southampton at Craven Cottage in the 1951/52 relegation season. Haynes played for another 18 years, notching 657 appearances (along with many other club records too), his last appearance for Fulham coming on 17 January 1970. He is often considered as the greatest player in Fulham history, and never played for another team in Britain. He gained 56 caps for England (22 as captain), with many being earned while playing for Fulham in the Second Division. Haynes was injured in a car accident in Blackpool in 1962, but by his own admissions never regained the fitness or form to play for England again, missing out on England's victory in the FIFA World Cup 1966 for which he would have stood a chance of being selected. The Stevenage Road Stand was renamed in his honour after his death in a car crash in 2005.\nFulham reached the 1957-58 FA Cup semi-finals, the best cup run of Haynes' career and nearest he came to a major trophy win playing in England. They were eliminated in a replay by the remnants of Manchester United's Busby Babes team that had been decimated in the Munich air disaster the month before. United were the first top division team Fulham played in that cup run. Fulham won promotion back to the First Division in the following season by finishing second to Sheffield Wednesday. Also joining Fulham in 1958 was Graham Leggat, who went on to score 134 goals in 277 appearances, (making him the club's fifth all-time top scorer). In the 1959\u201360 season, they achieved tenth position in the First Division, which until finishing ninth in the 2003\u201304 season was their highest-ever league position. This accompanied another appearance in the last four of the FA Cup in 1962.\nBy this time, the club were regularly playing in front of 30,000 plus crowds at Craven Cottage, despite struggling in the league.\nThe club experienced several close escapes from relegation, none more so than in 1965\u201366. On the morning of 26 February 1966, Fulham were bottom with just 15 points from 29 matches. The last 13 games saw Fulham win nine and draw two to reach safety. Eventually, however, the club suffered relegation in the 1967\u201368 season, having won just ten out of their 42 games. Even that, however, was not as catastrophic as the calamity of next season. Winning only seven in 42, the club were again relegated to the Third Division. (Note that this is not the same as the Third Division South, as the regional Third Divisions had been removed with the 1959 creation of the Fourth Division).\n1970\u20131994: Mixed fortunes outside the top flight.\nThe aforementioned Third Division hiatus lasted only two seasons before the club was promoted back to the Second Division as runners-up in 1970\u201371. This spell also saw Fulham invited to the Anglo-Italian Cup, which saw the club draw four out of four games in 1972\u201373 season. This preceded a period of high-profile signings for the club under Alec Stock in the mid-1970s, including Alan Mullery and Bobby Moore. Fulham reached their only FA Cup final in 1975, having won their first semi-final in five attempts. The club then lost to West Ham United in the final. This gained the club qualification to another European tournament, the Anglo-Scottish Cup, where they made the final, losing to Middlesbrough.\nGeorge Best played 47 times for the club in the 1976\u201377 season. Rodney Marsh, who having grown up with Fulham in the 1960s went on to play First Division football and play for England, rejoined the club in the same season, playing only 16 games. This capped one of the most successful eras in Fulham history.\nThe club were relegated again after winning only 11 in 42 matches in the 1979\u201380 season, which eventually resulted in Bobby Campbell's sacking in October 1980, to be replaced by Malcolm Macdonald. With a strong squad during his 1980\u20131984 period in charge (with players such as Ray Houghton, Tony Gale, Paul Parker, Gerry Peyton and Ray Lewington), they won promotion again in 1981\u201382 back to the Second Division, although the promotion was overshadowed by the suicide of former defender Dave Clement a few weeks before promotion was sealed.\nIn 1980, Fulham founded the rugby league club that is now London Broncos designed to be an extra stream of income for the football club, but which made financial losses every year while linked to Fulham F.C. Then called \"Fulham Rugby League,\" they played at Craven Cottage until moving away from the parent club in 1984.\nIn 1978, Fulham had signed Gordon \"Ivor\" Davies who, during two spells at Fulham, became the club's leading goalscorer of all time with a total of 178 goals in all competitions; the record still stands. Fulham narrowly missed out on back-to-back promotions to the First Division, losing 1\u20130 to Derby County away on the last day of the 1982\u201383 season \u2013 although the match was abandoned after 88 minutes due to a pitch invasion and inexplicably never replayed or finished. The side which had shown so much promise was quickly sold off as the club were in debt, so it was little surprise when the club were relegated again to the Third Division in 1986. The club nearly went out of business in 1987 via an ill-advised merger attempt with Queens Park Rangers. It was only the intervention of ex-player Jimmy Hill that allowed the club to stay in business as a re-structured Fulham FC 1987 Ltd. In 1987, the club took part in what was then the longest penalty deciders ever recorded \u2013 it needed 28 spot kicks to sort out a winner between them and Aldershot following a Freight Rover Trophy match.\nIn 1992, the foundation of the Premier League, and the resignation of 22 clubs from The Football League, restored Fulham to that league's Second Division. However, the club were relegated to the new Third Division after a poor 1993\u201394 season, following which Ian Branfoot was appointed as team manager.\n1994\u20131997: Fulham's lowest ebb.\nAfter an eighth-place finish in Branfoot's first season in charge, the club hit its lowest-ever final league position in the 1995\u201396 season, finishing 17th out of 24.&lt;ref name=\"Final 1994/1995 Football League Two Table\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Final 1995/1996 Football League Two Table\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Branfoot was sacked as manager, but remained at the club in other capacities for a short while. In February 1996, Micky Adams became player-manager. Adams oversaw an upturn in form that lifted the side out of relegation danger. The next season, he engineered a second-place league finish, missing out on first place because several years previously the league had dropped the old \"goal difference\" system in favour of a \"goals scored\" tally, meaning Fulham finished behind Wigan Athletic. The club's chairman Jimmy Hill had argued that goals scored should decide places of teams tied on points, and the Football League clubs had voted the system in.\n1997\u20132001: Al Fayed takeover.\nEgyptian businessman Mohamed Al-Fayed bought the club for \u00a36.25\u00a0million in summer 1997. The club was purchased via Bill Muddyman's Muddyman Group. Micky Adams was replaced by Al-Fayed in the aftermath of a mid-table start to the season. He installed a two-tier management \"dream team\" of Ray Wilkins as First Team Manager and Kevin Keegan as chief operating officer, pledging that the club would reach the Premier League within five years. After an argument over team selection, Wilkins left the club in May 1998 to hand over the full managerial duties to Keegan, who helped steer the club to promotion the next season, winning 101 points out of a possible 138, after spending \u00a31.1\u00a0million to sign Paul Peschisolido from West Bromwich Albion, who was top scorer and captained by Chris Coleman \u2013 then the most expensive footballer outside the top two divisions of the English league.\nIn 1999, Keegan left Fulham to become manager of England, and Paul Bracewell was put in charge.\nBracewell was sacked in March 2000, as Fulham's promising early season form dwindled away to a mid-table finish. Frenchman Jean Tigana was put in charge and, having signed a number of young stars (including French striker Louis Saha), he guided Fulham to their third promotion in five seasons in the 2000\u201301 season, giving Fulham top-flight status for the first time since 1968. Fulham once again amassed 101 points out of a possible 138 in their scintillating title run, which was crowned with an open-top bus parade down Fulham Palace Road. They are the only team to have twice reached 100 points in a season. During the season, Chris Coleman was involved in a car crash that put him out of action for well over a year and eventually ended his playing career after he failed to make a sufficient recovery. Fulham's run through the divisions saw a large turnover of players, with the only player to play for the club in all four leagues being Sean Davis.\n2001\u20132007: Early Premier League years.\nFulham returned to the top division of English football, and competed in the Premier League for the first time. The club finished the 2001\u201302 season in 13th place. Fulham were the only team to host top-flight football with some standing areas in the 21st century, but due to restrictions on standing, this was not allowed to continue; clubs promoted from the second division had only three years to make their ground all-seater. Fulham were forced to groundshare with QPR at Loftus Road during the 2002\u201303 and 2003\u201304 seasons while Craven Cottage was rebuilt as an all-seated stadium. There were fears that Fulham would not return to the Cottage, after it was revealed that Al-Fayed had sold the first right to build on the ground to a property development firm.\nIn 2002\u201303, Fulham spent most of the season in the lower half of the table. Chairman Al-Fayed told manager Jean Tigana that his contract would not be renewed at the end of the season. However, with five games left to play and relegation still possible, Tigana was sacked, and Chris Coleman was temporarily put in charge. Fulham won 10 points from a possible 15 and managed to avoid relegation. Coleman was appointed manager on a permanent basis in the summer of 2003; despite predictions that the inexperience of Coleman would result in Fulham's relegation, he kept the club well clear of relegation, guiding them to a club record ninth-place finish in his debut season. This might have been greater had the club not come under significant financial pressure to sell Louis Saha to Manchester United, for whom they received a club record \u00a313\u00a0million.\nFulham lost a legal case against former manager Tigana in 2004 after Al-Fayed wrongly alleged that Tigana had overpaid more than \u00a37\u00a0million for new players and had negotiated transfers in secret.\nColeman notched up another satisfactory performance in the 2004\u201305 season and guided Fulham to a secure 13th-place finish. The following season Fulham improved by one place, finishing 12th \u2013 the high point of the season was a 1\u20130 win over local rivals and reigning champions Chelsea in the West London derby \u2013 Chelsea had only lost two games in two and a half years. The 2006\u201307 season proved to be Coleman's last, as on 10 April 2007, Fulham terminated his contract with immediate effect. His replacement was Northern Ireland manager Lawrie Sanchez. Fulham only gained four points from five games with Sanchez as caretaker manager. They ensured top-flight survival that season by defeating a weakened Liverpool side 1\u20130 in the penultimate match of the season, and Sanchez was appointed manager.\n2007\u20132010: Hodgson's transformation.\nSanchez received strong financial backing from the board and made a number of signings during the summer break, but, after just two league wins in the first five months of the season and with Fulham in the relegation zone, he was dismissed on 21 December 2007 after a defeat to Newcastle United. Roy Hodgson was named as the new manager of Fulham on 28 December 2007 and took up his contractual duties on 30 December, just two days before the January transfer window opened.\nHodgson's tenure did not start well and it took a month to secure his first win, against Aston Villa, courtesy of a Jimmy Bullard free-kick. Fulham continued to struggle and a 3\u20131 home defeat in April at the hands of fellow strugglers Sunderland left Hodgson on the verge of tears in the post-match press conference and many pundits writing off Fulham's survival chances. Despite the negative press, Hodgson continued to believe survival was attainable. The turning point of the season came in the third-to-last match, against Manchester City. Fulham trailed 2\u20130 at half-time and had the Premier League scores at that time become results, they would have been relegated. However, the introduction of Diomansy Kamara heralded the start of a fantastic comeback\u2014Kamara struck twice as Fulham registered an amazing 3\u20132 victory. Fulham then won a crucial match against fellow strugglers Birmingham City at Craven Cottage, leaving survival in the club's own hands. Barring a goal-rush from fellow strugglers Reading, a win against a Portsmouth side looking ahead to their fourth FA Cup final would guarantee survival.\nWith 15 minutes to play at Portsmouth, Fulham were drawing, and with Birmingham City and Reading leading comfortably against Blackburn Rovers and Derby County respectively, they looked likely to be relegated. However, Fulham earned a free-kick with 76 minutes played; Jimmy Bullard's delivery found Danny Murphy, who headed home the decisive goal, sparking manic celebrations from the travelling fans. Hodgson had ensured survival against all odds, breaking several club records in the process and cementing his place in Fulham folklore. Fulham narrowly missed out on a UEFA Cup place via Fairplay by a dubious 0.8 of a point behind Manchester City, who lost 8\u20131 at Middlesbrough.\nIn the 2008\u201309 season, Fulham finished seventh, their highest-ever league placing, earning qualification for the inaugural UEFA Europa League, the second time that the club had entered a UEFA competition.\n2009\u201310 was arguably the most successful season in the club's history. They were eliminated from the FA Cup in the quarter-finals for the second year running, and finished 12th in the Premier League, despite fielding weakened teams in the last few matches. In the inaugural Europa League season, however, Fulham reached the final, meeting Spanish club Atl\u00e9tico Madrid, who had dropped down from the Champions League, at the Volksparkstadion in Hamburg. In their first European cup final, the Cottagers were beaten 2\u20131 after extra time, having drawn 1\u20131 after full-time. The achievement of taking Fulham so unexpectedly far, beating famous teams like Hamburger SV, Juventus, holders Shakhtar Donetsk and Basel in the competition, led to Roy Hodgson being voted the LMA Manager of the Year by the widest margin in the history of the award. The home match in the round of 16 was arguably Fulham's greatest result in the history of the club. Despite losing 3\u20131 in the first leg at Italian giants Juventus and falling behind minutes into the second leg at Craven Cottage, Fulham scored four goals with no reply from Juventus.\nAt the end of the season, Hodgson left Fulham to manage Liverpool.\n2010\u20132013: Established in the Premier League.\nOn 29 July 2010, Mark Hughes was named the successor to Hodgson, signing a two-year contract with the club. Hughes had previously managed Manchester City, the Welsh national team and Blackburn. Hughes' first match in charge was against Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium. The highlight of the season was a 4\u20130 win in the FA Cup over London rivals Tottenham Hotspur, all goals coming in the first half. Hughes resigned as manager of Fulham on 2 June 2011, having spent fewer than 11 months at the club. The Whites had an encouraging finish in eighth position and qualified for the Europa League via Fairplay.\nOn 7 June 2011, Martin Jol signed a two-year contract with Fulham, becoming successor to Hughes. Jol's first match was a 3\u20130 Europa League win against NS\u00cd Runav\u00edk of the Faroe Islands on 30 June. Fulham then navigated their way with some ease to the group stage in the Europa League through late summer. However, the Cottagers were knocked out with the last seconds of the group stage matches, Odense BK equalising to make a draw, leaving Fulham in third place, with Polish side Wis\u0142a Krak\u00f3w instead progressing to the next round.\nFulham's Premier League form in the 2011\u201312 season was mixed, with the continuing away-record hangover of previous seasons dragging on. In October 2011, Fulham had an emphatic 6\u20130 home win over neighbours QPR, with Andrew Johnson scoring a hat-trick for Fulham in the match. The January 2012 transfer window saw Bobby Zamora move over the Hammersmith flyover to Loftus Road, with Russian striker Pavel Pogrebnyak coming in place from VfB Stuttgart.\nThe New Year saw two further hat-tricks scored by Clint Dempsey. On 11 February 2012, Progrebnyak scored on his debut in the 2\u20131 win over Stoke City. In March 2012, a 5\u20130 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers saw a hat-trick from Pogrebnyak. The Cottagers broke their historic drought on Merseyside with a 1\u20130 win over Liverpool at Anfield on May Day and another win against Sunderland in the last home game meant Fulham were only one point short of equalling their largest points haul in the Premier League, with just one game remaining. However, they failed to achieve this after losing their last game away at Tottenham.\nIn the 2012\u201313 season, Fulham ended a seven-match winless run by beating Swansea City 3\u20130 away at the Liberty Stadium on the final game of the season on 19 May 2013. Fulham finished the season in 12th place.\n2013\u2013present: Shahid Khan's ownership.\nShahid Khan took over as chairman in July 2013, but after a poor start to the 2013\u201314 season, having only amassed 10 points from 13 games, Martin Jol was sacked as manager on 1 December 2013, with Ren\u00e9 Meulensteen taking charge as head coach. Meulensteen was replaced by Felix Magath after just 17 games in charge following no upturn in form, but fortunes did not improve, and Fulham were eventually relegated to the Championship after a 4\u20131 defeat away to Stoke on 3 May. Post-season, the media criticised chairman Shahid Khan's decision to sack Meulensteen and appoint the third manager of the season in Magath.\nFulham broke the Championship transfer record that summer in a restructuring of the squad by Magath, but after a disarstarious start to the new season, amassing just one point in seven games, Magath was sacked in September 2014, with Kit Symons appointed as caretaker manager. Fulham eventually finished the season in 17th place. The team suffered an inconsistent start to the following season and after a 5\u20132 loss at home to Birmingham City, and lying in 12th place, Kit Symons was sacked as manager in November 2015. It paved the way for Serbian Slavi\u0161a Jokanovi\u0107 to be appointed on 27 December 2015. Fulham's fortunes did not improve greatly following Jokanovi\u0107's appointment, but the team finished the 2015\u201316 Championship season in 20th place, avoiding relegation by 11 points.\nThe 2016\u201317 season saw huge improvements in both results and performances. Despite an inconsistent start, the team saw a significant improvement from October onwards which saw them secure a 6th place finish. They entered the play-offs, but lost to Reading 2\u20131 on aggregate in the semi-final. Despite a slow start to the following season, the club went on a club-record 23 game unbeaten run in the league which led to a 3rd-place finish, narrowly missing out automatic promotion. The team went on to win the EFL Championship play-off Final against Aston Villa to return to the Premier League on 26 May 2018.\nFollowing a poor start to life back in the Premier League, Jokanovi\u0107 was sacked on 14 November 2018 and replaced with former Leicester manager Claudio Ranieri. Results ultimately did not improve under Ranieri and he left the club in February 2019. He was replaced by Scott Parker as caretaker manager who could not save the club from relegation on 3 April 2019. Parker was appointed as manager on a permanent basis on 10 May 2019. In a season that was interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, Parker led the club straight back to the Premier League on 4 August 2020, defeating London rivals Brentford 2\u20131 in the playoff final after a 4th-place finish.\nFinances.\nFulham Football Club is owned by Shahid Khan. Khan completed his purchase of the club from Mohamed Al-Fayed on 12 July 2013 for a reported \u00a3150\u2013200 million.\nDuring his ownership of Fulham, Al-Fayed had provided the club with \u00a3187 million in interest-free loans. In March 2011, Fulham posted annual losses of \u00a316.9 million, with Al-Fayed stating that he would \"continue to make funds available to achieve our goals both on and off the pitch\" and that \"the continued success of Fulham and its eventual financial self-sustainability is my priority.\" As of January 2013, Fulham were effectively debt-free as Al-Fayed converted the loans into equity in the club.\nKit manufacturers and shirt sponsors.\nFulham's sponsorship by Betfair in 2002\u201303 was the first gambling sponsorship in English football, and came before the Gambling Act 2005 permitted the industry to advertise on television and radio; within fifteen years half of Premier League teams were sponsored by such companies.\nFulham in Europe.\nFulham are a member of the European Club Association, having qualified four times for European Competition, firstly the UEFA Intertoto Cup after their inaugural season in the Premier League, then the UEFA Cup as a result of winning that, and then the UEFA Europa League twice. Fulham are unbeaten at home in European competition, in 23 games, with a record of 17 wins and six draws. In 2010, Fulham reached the UEFA Europa League final, which they lost 2\u20131 to Atletico Madrid.\nRivalries.\nFulham fans consider their main rivals to be Chelsea. Despite this fixture not being played that often in the years preceding Fulham's ascent to the top division, this is a clear local derby as Chelsea's ground, Stamford Bridge, is within Fulham and only 1.8 miles from Craven Cottage.\nFulham consider their secondary rivals to be Queens Park Rangers. Fulham last played QPR in the 2000\u201301 season before meeting them again twice in the 2011\u201312 Premier League season in which Fulham were the victors with a 6\u20130 victory at Craven Cottage, and beating them 1\u20130 away from home at Loftus Road. Fulham also have rivalries with other London clubs, including Brentford and Crystal Palace.\nOutside of London, Gillingham are still considered rivals to Fulham supporters despite the two clubs having played in different divisions for the past 11 years. Fulham and Gillingham have been involved in several ill-tempered matches in the lower leagues, including the death of a Fulham supporter.\nSupporters.\nFulham's fan base has fluctuated over the years, with high crowds coinciding with the club's success in the Premier League so that the club now averages in the top 20 home attendances in the country. Fulham supporters have played a vital role in the club's long term stay at Craven Cottage. When the club moved temporarily to Loftus Road, a committee known as Back to the Cottage was formed, committed to ensuring the club continued to play at their traditional home. Fulham fans have traditionally come from the Fulham and Hammersmith areas, and also from other areas in South-West London, such as Putney, Richmond, Sutton and Worcester Park.\nIn July 2012, the club website asked supporters using Facebook and Twitter to pick their best FFC Premier League XI from 2001 to the present. The supporters picked their favourite goalkeeper, full-backs, centre-backs, wingers, centre midfielders and forwards in a classic 4\u20134\u20132 formation.\nManagers.\nFulham have had 37 managers in 114 years. Prior to the appointment of the first manager at the club (Bradshaw in 1904), the duties normally assigned to a modern-day manager would have been shared between club secretary, captain, and other officials.\nManagerial records:\nTemporary managers at the club have included:\nGrounds.\nBetween the years 1879 and when Fulham had a ground to call their own in 1896, they played at a number of stadiums, only some of which were recorded and this should not be regarded as a full or complete list. Only rivals and former landlords Queens Park Rangers have played at more home stadiums. Some of the early grounds listed below are likely to have been parks and parkland, which have now been developed. Even when the club purchased Craven Cottage and the surrounding land in 1894, they had to wait two years before they could play a game there.\nClub mascot.\nThe Fulham mascot is Billy the Badger, who was the winning design sent in by Kyle Jackson after an online competition by the club. Billy the Badger wears the number 79 Fulham shirt, in reference to the club's year of founding, 1879. Controversy first surrounded Billy when he tried to cheer up Chelsea manager Avram Grant during a home match in front of the television cameras. Secondly, Billy was seen on television being sent off during the home game against Aston Villa on 3 February 2008 for break-dancing in the corner of the pitch after the referee had commenced the game. Billy blamed his badger hearing and eyesight for the incident, and apologised to referee Chris Foy. On 11 March 2009, Billy walked across the goal during a match although it was not spotted by the referee. The former mascot for Fulham was Sir Craven of Cottage, the Knight. The cheerleaders were known as the Cravenettes."}
{"id": "11229", "revid": "38775737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11229", "title": "Frankie Goes to Hollywood", "text": "Frankie Goes to Hollywood were an English band formed in Liverpool, England, in the 1980s. The group was fronted by Holly Johnson (vocals), with Paul Rutherford (vocals), Peter Gill (drums, percussion), Mark O'Toole (bass guitar) and Brian Nash (guitar).\nThe group's 1983 debut single \"Relax\" was banned by the BBC in 1984 while at number six in the charts and subsequently topped the UK Singles Chart for five consecutive weeks, going on to enjoy prolonged chart success throughout that year and ultimately becoming the seventh-best-selling UK single of all time. It also won the 1985 Brit Award for Best British Single. Their debut album, \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\", reached number one in the UK in 1984 with advanced sales of more than one million. After the follow-up success of \"Two Tribes\" and \"The Power of Love\", the group became only the second act in the history of the UK charts to reach number one with their first three singles; the first being fellow Liverpudlians Gerry and the Pacemakers in the 1960s. This record remained unbeaten until the Spice Girls achieved a six-single streak in 1996\u20131997.\nIn 1985 the band won the Brit Award for British Breakthrough Act. Associated with the Second British Invasion of the US, they also received Grammy Award and MTV Video Music Award nominations for Best New Artist. Songwriters Johnson, Gill and O'Toole received the 1984 Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers, and Authors for Best Song Musically and Lyrically for \"Two Tribes\". In 2015, the song was voted by the British public as the nation's 14th-favourite 1980s number one in a poll for ITV.\nCareer.\nFormation.\nOn the B-side to the group's first single, Johnson explained that the group's name derived from a page from \"The New Yorker\" magazine, featuring the headline \"Frankie Goes Hollywood\" and a picture of Frank Sinatra, although the magazine page Johnson referred to was actually a pop art poster by Guy Peellaert. The original group named \"Frankie Goes to Hollywood\" dates from 1980.\nThe nucleus of the group emerged from the late 1970s Liverpool punk scene. Lead singer Johnson had played bass with Big in Japan and had also released two solo singles. Local musicians Peter Gill (drums), Jed O'Toole (bass), and O'Toole's cousin Brian Nash (guitar) initially joined Johnson, calling themselves the Sons of Egypt. This line-up secured a number of small local gigs before disbanding.\nThe group was reprised when Johnson joined Mark O'Toole (bass) and Peter \"Ped\" Gill to form FGTH. During a particularly fluid period of personnel changes, Jed O'Toole joined FGTH on guitar, and a female vocalist, Sonia Mazumder, was also a band member for the first Frankie gig at the Leeds nightclub \"The Warehouse\", supporting Hambi &amp; The Dance. Paul Rutherford\u2014a member of the headline act who had also sung in seminal Liverpool punk band The Spitfire Boys\u2014apparently got so caught up in Frankie's performance that he effectively replaced Mazumder that very night. The new all-male musical line-up subsequently toured locally with a leather-clad female duo known as \"The Leatherpets\" and managed to fund promotional videos and demos, despite being eventually turned down by both Arista Records and Phonogram Inc. In October 1982, the group recorded a John Peel Session for BBC Radio 1, comprising the originals \"Krisco Kisses\", \"Two Tribes\", \"Disneyland\", and \"The World Is My Oyster\". Around this time Jed O'Toole left the group, to be replaced by the returning Brian Nash.\nNash said the band looked up to Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD) and The Teardrop Explodes, adding, \"That was music from Liverpool but from our generation. You would see these people walking around town, you'd see Ian McCulloch getting on the bus. I never saw any of the Beatles on the bus.\"\nIn February 1983, the group was invited to record a video for \"Relax\" by the Channel 4 show \"The Tube\" at the Liverpool State Ballroom. After the broadcast, the Peel session was repeated on radio, and a new session recorded for the BBC, comprising \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\", \"The Only Star in Heaven\" and \"Relax\". These performances, along with a repeat of the \"Tube\" video, convinced Trevor Horn to sign the group for his new label, ZTT Records, in May 1983.\n\"Relax\".\n\"Relax\" was released by ZTT in October 1983, with production and remix directed by Trevor Horn, received a modicum of airplay, allowing it steady progress into the UK Top 40. Following a debut on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\" on 5 January 1984 while at number 35, the single rose to number six the following week.\nOn 11 January 1984, BBC Radio 1 disc jockey Mike Read was playing the record on his show when he noticed the front cover design (by Yvonne Gilbert). Read apparently became outraged by the \"overtly sexual\" nature of both the record sleeve and the printed lyrics, which prompted him to remove the disc from the turntable live on air, branding it \"obscene\".\nTwo days later\u2014almost three months after the single's initial release, and just eight days after the group's \"Top of the Pops\" appearance\u2014the BBC banned the record from all its TV and radio outlets. \"Relax\" immediately shot to number one in the UK charts and stayed there for five weeks, during which time the BBC could not feature the nation's best-selling single on \"Top of the Pops\".\nThe original video was directed by Bernard Rose and depicted a gay S&amp;M parlour where the band members were admired by muscular leathermen, a bleached blonde drag queen, and a large-bodied man dressed as a Roman emperor. The video featured a scene where one of the band members wrestled a live tiger, to the admiration of the clubgoers, and ended where the \"emperor\" was so excited he shimmied out of his toga. Filmed in the unused East London theatre Wilton's Music Hall, it was promptly banned by both the BBC and MTV, resulting in the production of a substitute video directed by filmmaker Brian De Palma to coincide with the release of his film \"Body Double\". There have been 4 official music videos for \"Relax.\"\nThe BBC lifted its ban on \"Relax\" at the end of 1984 to allow the band to perform it on the Christmas edition of \"Top of the Pops\" (it had been, aside from Band Aid of which Holly Johnson was a participant, the biggest-selling single of the year).\n\"Two Tribes\".\n\"Relax\" remained in the charts when the follow-up, \"Two Tribes\", was released in May 1984. The anti-conflict song was given an aggressively topical nuclear war slant. Featuring sirens, the unmistakable voice of Patrick Allen (who had voiced the British Government's actual nuclear warning ads, \"Protect and Survive\", two years earlier) and another innovative electronic backing, it went straight into the UK charts at Number One and stayed there for nine weeks (the first single to do so since John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John's \"You're the One That I Want\" in 1978), with total sales exceeding 1.5 million copies and becoming one of the top 30 best-selling records in the UK ever.\nDirected by Kevin Godley and Lol Creme, the video featured lookalikes of Cold War leaders Ronald Reagan and Konstantin Chernenko wrestling in a marquee while band members and others laid bets on the outcome. Ultimately, the audience\u2014consisting of other world leaders\u2014were brought into the fight, and eventually Earth was seen to explode.\n\"Two Tribes\" was a successful single in its own right, but its reign at the top of the charts was made even more notable by the continuing success of its predecessor. \"Relax\" had made a natural decline down the charts by May 1984, but on the release of \"Two Tribes\" its sales began to increase again, to the extent that FGTH held the top two spots in the UK charts during July 1984, the first active group to do so since the early 1960s.\nThe release of \"Two Tribes\" also coincided with an extensive and iconic T-shirt marketing campaign during the British summer of 1984, featuring such slogans as \"Frankie Say War! Hide Yourself\" and \"Frankie Say Relax Don't Do It!\"\n\"The Power of Love\".\nFGTH released a third single, \"The Power of Love\", at the end of 1984. Unlike the earlier singles, this song was a slower-paced ballad, but it also went to Number One in December and making the band the first act for two decades (since Gerry and the Pacemakers, a fellow Liverpool band, in 1963) to achieve chart-toppers with its first three releases. The video was not banned on this occasion but still caused trouble for the group\u2014because it depicted a nativity scene (and on its first showing did not feature any members of the band, who were subsequently added as picture framing).\nThe song's release was preceded by an advertising campaign that, cheekily, declared it to be the band's third number one single, as if this was a fait accompli. The Band Aid project, for which Johnson recorded a message for the B-side, meant that FGTH managed only one week at the top this time before it was replaced by \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\"\n\"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\".\nThe title track from FGTH's album, \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\", was released as a fourth single in March 1985. Early promotional posters for the single proclaimed it as \"their fourth number one\", even prior to the single's release. However, the single peaked at Number 2. The twelve-inch singles featured Greek mythology/Samuel Taylor Coleridge spoken introduction. Geoffrey Palmer narrates on the second 12\", known as the \"fruitness\" mix.\nOnly one new track appeared in the next eighteen months; \"Disneyland\", was released on the ZTT Records \"Zang Tuum Tumb Sampled\" album in late 1985.\nReturn and decline.\nIn 1986, FGTH appeared at the Montreux Rock Festival which was broadcast on UK television. This performance saw the first airings of two future singles, namely \"Rage Hard\" and \"Warriors of the Wasteland\". Both versions were different from the versions eventually released. In August 1986, the long-awaited new Frankie Goes to Hollywood single, \"Rage Hard\", was released, reaching number 4 in the UK. Initially showcased promotionally with songs like \"Warriors of the Wasteland\", the group's sound had developed a significantly harder edge with a less flamboyant, more nitty-gritty lyrical side. The album, \"Liverpool\", was released in October 1986 and reached UK No.\u00a05. It was generally panned by the music press and chart returns declined rapidly with the follow-up singles \"Warriors of the Wasteland\" (No.\u00a019) and \"Watching the Wildlife\" (No.\u00a028). The group meanwhile threatened to implode of its own accord, in the course of a tour promoting the new album. Johnson kept himself markedly separate from the rest of the band when offstage during this period, tensions becoming exacerbated during a backstage altercation between Johnson and O'Toole at Wembley Arena in January 1987, reflecting the generally collapsing relationship between lead singer and the rest of the band. Things were so bad that fellow Liverpudlian singer Pete Wylie was approached to replace Johnson but declined the offer. FGTH completed the tour, but Johnson ultimately left the group thereafter, citing musical estrangement.\nAftermath.\nIn the aftermath of the group split, Johnson was offered a solo recording agreement with MCA Records. However, ZTT, which maintained they had invested heavily in \"Liverpool\" (to the extent that the digital recording system used to record the album was very nearly treated as a sixth member of the band on the sleeve of the \"Warriors of the Wasteland\" single), had other ideas, and promptly sued Johnson in an attempt to hold him to his original contract with the label. Among other things, ZTT believed that as a departing member of FGTH, Johnson was required to release all solo material through the label until the band's original multiple-album agreement was fulfilled. The suit was bitterly fought, exposing the inner workings of the ZTT/Frankie machine to a giddy UK music press.\nAfter two years, the High Court found in Johnson's favour, holding that the highly restrictive terms of the contract constituted an unreasonable restraint of trade. The court case also effectively freed the remaining members of FGTH from their ZTT contract.\nLater years.\nJohnson's solo career at MCA commenced in 1989, with a succession of high-placed singles and the number one album \"Blast\". The remix collection \"Hollelujah\" followed, trailed by a second studio album, \"Dreams That Money Can't Buy\". However, Johnson's relations with MCA cooled with this release, and he would ultimately become a reclusive but successful painter, after announcing in 1993 that he was HIV-positive. The following year, Johnson recounted his version of Frankie's history in his autobiography \"A Bone in My Flute\". His self-issued 1999 album \"Soulstream\" included a re-recording of \"The Power of Love\", which was also released as a single.\nPaul Rutherford, the other openly gay member of the band, released the partially ABC produced album \"Oh World\" and a handful of singles before retiring with his New Zealander partner to Waiheke Island.\nThe \"other three\", as \"Smash Hits\" labelled them, continued to work together in what turned out to be a vain attempt to resurrect \"Frankie\" with various singers including Dee Harris from Fashion and Grant Boult (Jeckyl Ice) from The Premise, who had opened the shows on the band's UK and European tours. Under the name Boss Dog, with Boult on vocals, the band were offered a major deal with Virgin Records but on the condition they work as Frankie Goes to Hollywood. Johnson challenged the use of the name and the deal soured. Boult and Brian Nash continued with the material written by The Shuffle Brothers and under the name Low they released \"Tearing My Soul Apart\" in 1992 on Swanyard Records. As \"Nasher\", Nash released a 2002 solo album entitled \"Ripe\". Ped worked behind the scenes and scored a top ten hit with the group \"Lovestation\". Mark O'Toole moved to Florida and played with punk outfit \"Trapped by Mormons\".\nThe band's name lived on to the extent that re-issues of \"Relax\" and \"The Power of Love\" both returned to the UK Top 10 in 1993. Remixes of \"The Power of Love\" (which became a dance anthem from its original ballad format) and \"Two Tribes\" were Top 20 hits again in 2000, while \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" also got commercially successful remix treatment, to the extent of a Top 20 placing four years earlier.\nThe group's first two singles appeared sixth and 22nd, respectively, in the official all-time UK best-selling singles list issued in 2002.\nAmerican impostor group.\nIn 1998, a band calling itself alternately \"Frankie Goes to Hollywood\" and \"The New Frankie Goes to Hollywood Featuring Davey Johnson\" began to tour the United States. The band consisted of none of the original members of the band and formed without their knowledge or consent. The impostor band was led by an American using the stage name Davey Johnson, who alternately claimed he was Holly Johnson's brother and had performed as an uncredited session musician on \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\". The members of the actual band and their producer Trevor Horn refuted both claims. Mark O'Toole, who had been living in Florida, became aware of the band and warned concert promoters not to hire them. Likewise, A Flock of Seagulls frontman Mike Score, who had been a Liverpool acquaintance of the members of Frankie Goes to Hollywood, kicked the impostor band off his tour after discovering they were a fraud. After Holly Johnson contacted the trade magazine \"Pollstar\" to confirm that the American-based act was unauthorized, the impostor band was dropped by a booking agent, but continued to be booked by small clubs throughout the southern United States. The fake group continued to perform until at least September 2000, when a feature on the controversy was published in that month's issue of \"Spin\".\nReunion and comeback.\nIn 2003, the VH-1 program \"Bands Reunited\" brought Johnson, Rutherford, Gill, Nash, and Mark O'Toole together, in the hope of their agreeing to perform impromptu on the show. However, a reunion performance did not transpire. Both Johnson and Nash had reservations about performing at short notice in the contrived manner dictated by the TV show format.\nIn 2004, a celebration of the 25th anniversary of Trevor Horn's involvement in the music industry a special concert took place at Wembley Arena in November, featuring three of the original FGTH line-up, Mark O'Toole, Peter (Ped) Gill and Paul Rutherford and another former member, Jed O'Toole. Original vocalist Johnson, who announced via the Internet that he would not be appearing, and guitarist Nash, who declined to appear for his own reasons, did not take part. Jed O'Toole took over guitar duties for the event, whilst an open audition was held for a new singer for the concert. Ryan Molloy was recruited as a result.\nThe same lineup reunited for a tour in 2005 playing festivals in Europe. They headlined the Big Gay Out festival at Hyde Park in London.\nAfter some confusion with ensuing tour dates, the band posted a warning on their website that many of the tour dates listed by ticket promoters were inaccurate. The band became increasingly focused on the release of a new album during 2007. However, in early April 2007 came the news that Gill, Rutherford, J. O'Toole and Molloy had formed Forbidden Hollywood to play their new songs alongside old FGTH material. This was to avoid legal issues with Holly Johnson over use of the Frankie Goes to Hollywood name. Live dates were announced but in June 2007, these were cancelled.\nAwards and nominations.\n! Year !! Awards !! Work !! Category !! Result\nComputer game.\nIn 1985, a computer game entitled \"Frankie Goes to Hollywood\" was developed by Denton Designs and published by Ocean Software. Based on the band's music, imagery and slogans, the objective of the game was to explore the town of Mundanesville to find the Pleasuredome. It also came boxed with an extra cassette with a live version of \"Relax\" on it."}
{"id": "11230", "revid": "185212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11230", "title": "Fulham Football Club", "text": ""}
{"id": "11231", "revid": "503631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11231", "title": "Factors of production", "text": "In economics, factors of production, resources, or inputs are what is used in the production process to produce output\u2014that is, finished goods and services. The utilized amounts of the various inputs determine the quantity of output according to the relationship called the production function. There are three \"basic\" resources or factors of production: land, labour and capital. The factors are also frequently labeled \"producer goods or services\" to distinguish them from the goods or services purchased by consumers, which are frequently labeled \"consumer goods\".\nThere are two types of factors: \"primary\" and \"secondary\". The previously mentioned primary factors are land, labour and capital. Materials and energy are considered secondary factors in classical economics because they are obtained from land, labour, and capital. The primary factors facilitate production but neither becomes part of the product (as with raw materials) nor becomes significantly transformed by the production process (as with fuel used to power machinery). Land includes not only the site of production but also natural resources above or below the soil. Recent usage has distinguished human capital (the stock of knowledge in the labor force) from labor. Entrepreneurship is also sometimes considered a factor of production. Sometimes the overall state of technology is described as a factor of production. The number and definition of factors vary, depending on theoretical purpose, empirical emphasis, or school of economics.\nHistorical schools and factors.\nIn the interpretation of the currently dominant view of classical economic theory developed by neoclassical economists, the term \"factors\" did not exist until after the classical period and is not to be found in any of the literature of that time.\nDifferences are most stark when it comes to deciding which factor is the most important.\nPhysiocracy.\nPhysiocracy (from the Greek for \"government of nature\") is an economic theory developed by a group of 18th century Enlightenment French economists who believed that the wealth of nations was derived solely from the value of \"land agriculture\" or \"land development\" and that agricultural products should be highly priced.\nClassical.\nThe classical economics of Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and their followers focus on physical resources in defining its factors of production and discuss the distribution of cost and value among these factors. Adam Smith and David Ricardo referred to the \"component parts of price\" as the costs of using:\nThe classical economists also employed the word \"capital\" in reference to money. Money, however, was not considered to be a factor of production in the sense of capital stock since it is not used to directly produce any good. The return to loaned money or to loaned stock was styled as interest while the return to the actual proprietor of capital stock (tools, etc.) was styled as profit. See also returns.\nMarxism.\nMarx considered the \"elementary factors of the labor-process\" or \"productive forces\" to be:\nThe \"subject of labor\" refers to natural resources and raw materials, including land. The \"instruments of labor\" are tools, in the broadest sense. They include factory buildings, infrastructure, and other human-made objects that facilitate labor's production of goods and services.\nThis view seems similar to the classical perspective described above. But unlike the classical school and many economists today, Marx made a clear distinction between labor actually done and an individual's \"labor power\" or ability to work. Labor done is often referred to nowadays as \"effort\" or \"labor services.\" Labor-power might be seen as a stock which can produce a flow of labor.\nLabor, not labor power, is the key factor of production for Marx and the basis for Marx's labor theory of value. The hiring of labor power only results in the production of goods or services (\"use-values\") when organized and regulated (often by the \"management\"). How much labor is actually done depends on the importance of conflict or tensions within the labor process.\nNeoclassical economics.\nNeoclassical economics, one of the branches of mainstream economics, started with the classical factors of production of land, labor, and capital. However, it developed an alternative theory of value and distribution. Many of its practitioners have added various further factors of production (see below).\nFurther distinctions from classical and neoclassical microeconomics include the following:\nEcological economics.\nEcological economics is an alternative to neoclassical economics. It integrates, among other things, the first and second laws of thermodynamics (see: Laws of thermodynamics) to formulate more realistic economic systems that adhere to fundamental physical limitations. In addition to the neoclassical focus on efficient allocation, ecological economics emphasizes sustainability of scale and just distribution. Ecological economics also differ from neoclassical theories in its definitions of factors of production, replacing them with the following:\nIntegral to ecological economics is the following notion: at the maximum rates of sustainable matter and energy uptake, the only way to increase productivity would be through an increase in design intelligence. This provides the basis for a core tenet of ecological economics, namely that infinite growth is impossible.\nA fourth factor?\nIn the first half of the 20th century, some authors added the work of organization or entrepreneurship as a fourth factor of production. This became standard in the post-war Neoclassical synthesis. For example, J. B. Clark saw the co-ordinating function in production and distribution as being served by entrepreneurs; Frank Knight introduced managers who co-ordinate using their own money (financial capital) and the financial capital of others. In contrast, many economists today consider \"human capital\" (skills and education) as the fourth factor of production, with entrepreneurship as a form of human capital. Yet others refer to intellectual capital. More recently, many have begun to see \"social capital\" as a factor, as contributing to production of goods and services.\nEntrepreneurship.\nIn markets, entrepreneurs combine the other factors of production, land, labor, and capital, to make a profit. Often these entrepreneurs are seen as innovators, developing new ways to produce new products. In a planned economy, central planners decide how land, labor, and capital should be used to provide for maximum benefit for all citizens. Just as with market entrepreneurs, the benefits may mostly accrue to the entrepreneurs themselves.\nThe sociologist C. Wright Mills refers to \"new entrepreneurs\" who work within and between corporate and government bureaucracies in new and different ways. Others (such as those practicing public choice theory) refer to \"political entrepreneurs\", i.e., politicians and other actors.\nMuch controversy rages about the benefits produced by entrepreneurship. But the real issue is about how well institutions they operate in (markets, planning, bureaucracies, government) serve the public. This concerns such issues as the relative importance of market failure and government failure.\nIn the book \"Accounting of Ideas\", \"intequity\", a neologism, is abstracted from equity to add a newly researched production factor of the capitalist system. Equity, which is regarded as part of capital, was divided into equity and intequity. Entrepreneurship was divided into network-related matters and creating-related matters. Network-related matters function in the sphere of equity, and creating-related matters in spheres of intequities.\nNatural resources.\nAyres and Warr (2010) are among the economists who criticize orthodox economics for overlooking the role of natural resources and the effects of declining resource capital. See also: \"Natural resource economics\"\nEnergy.\nExercise can be seen as individual factor of production, with an elastication larger than labor. A cointegration analysis support results derived from linear exponential (LINEX) production functions.\nCultural heritage.\nC. H. Douglas disagreed with classical economists who recognized only three factors of production. While Douglas did not deny the role of these factors in production, he considered the \u201cCultural heritage\u201d as the primary factor. He defined cultural inheritance as the knowledge, techniques, and processes that have accrued to us incrementally from the origins of civilization (i.e., progress). Consequently, mankind does not have to keep \"reinventing the wheel\". \"We are merely the administrators of that cultural inheritance, and to that extent, the cultural inheritance is the property of all of us, without exception. Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx claimed that labor creates all value. While Douglas did not deny that all costs ultimately relate to labour charges of some sort (past or present), he denied that the present labour of the world creates all wealth. Douglas carefully distinguished between value, costs and prices. He claimed that one of the factors resulting in a misdirection of thought in terms of the nature and function of money was economists' near-obsession about values and their relation to prices and incomes. While Douglas recognized \"value in use\" as a legitimate theory of values, he also considered values as subjective and not capable of being measured in an objective manner.\nPeter Kropotkin argued for the common ownership of all intellectual and useful property due to the collective work that went into creating it. Kropotkin does not argue that the product of a worker's labor should belong to the worker. Instead, Kropotkin asserts that every individual product is essentially the work of everyone since every individual relies on the intellectual and physical labor of those who came before them as well as those who built the world around them. Because of this, Kropotkin proclaims that every human deserves an essential right to well-being because every human contributes to the collective social product: Kropotkin goes on to say that the central obstacle preventing humanity from claiming this right is the state's violent protection of private property. Kropotkin compares this relationship to feudalism, saying that even if the forms have changed, the essential relationship between the propertied and the landless is the same as the relationship between a feudal lord and their serfs."}
{"id": "11232", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11232", "title": "Fort Wayne, Indiana", "text": "Fort Wayne is a city in the U.S. state of Indiana and the seat of Allen County, United States. Located in northeastern Indiana, the city is west of the Ohio border and south of the Michigan border. The city's population was 270,402 as of the 2019 Census estimate making it the second-most populous city in Indiana after Indianapolis, and the 75th-most populous city in the United States. It is the principal city of the Fort Wayne metropolitan area, consisting of Allen, Wells, and Whitley counties, a combined population of 419,453 as of 2011. Fort Wayne is the cultural and economic center of northeastern Indiana. In addition to the three core counties, the combined statistical area (CSA) includes Adams, DeKalb, Huntington, Noble, and Steuben counties, with an estimated population of 615,077.\nFort Wayne was built in 1794 by the United States Army under the direction of American Revolutionary War general Anthony Wayne, the last in a series of forts built near the Miami village of Kekionga. Named in Wayne's honor, the European-American settlement developed at the confluence of the St. Joseph, St. Marys, and Maumee rivers as a trading post for pioneers. The village was platted in 1823 and underwent tremendous growth after completion of the Wabash and Erie Canal and advent of the railroad. Once a booming manufacturing town located in what became known as the Rust Belt, Fort Wayne's economy in the 21st century is based upon distribution, transportation and logistics, healthcare, professional and business services, leisure and hospitality, and financial services. The city is a center for the defense industry which employs thousands. There are also many jobs through local healthcare providers Parkview Health and Lutheran Health Network.\nFort Wayne was an All-America City Award recipient in 1982, 1998, and 2009. The city also received an Outstanding Achievement City Livability Award by the U.S. Conference of Mayors in 1999.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nNative Americans and New France.\nThis area at the confluence of rivers was long occupied by successive cultures of indigenous peoples. The Miami tribe established its settlement of Kekionga at the confluence of the Maumee, St. Joseph, and St. Marys rivers. It was the capital of the Miami nation and related Algonquian tribes.\nIn 1696, Comte de Frontenac appointed Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes as commander of the outpost. The French built Fort Miami in 1697 as part of a group of forts and trading posts built between Quebec and St. Louis. In 1721, a few years after Bissot's death, Fort Miami was replaced by Fort St. Philippe des Miamis. The first census in 1744 recorded a population of approximately 40 Frenchmen and 1,000 Miami.\nBritish control.\nIncreasing tension between France and Great Britain developed over control of the territory. In 1760, France ceded the area to Britain after its forces in North America surrendered during the Seven Years' War, known on the North American front as the French and Indian War. In 1763, various Native American nations rebelled against British rule and retook the fort as part of Pontiac's Rebellion. The Miami regained control of Kekionga, ruling it for more than 30 years.\nUS battles Native Americans.\nIn the Treaty of Paris (1783), which ended the American war for independence, Britain transferred to the new United States its claim of sovereignty over the Northwest Territory\u2014the area north and west of the Ohio River, east of the Mississippi River, and south of British Canada. The Native Americans already living there, though, were not part of that treaty and did not cede their ownership of those lands. American land speculators and pioneers began flooding down the Ohio River into the area, leading to conflict with an alliance of native tribes known as the Western Confederacy. It was headquartered at Kekionga, where the Miami had permitted two refugee tribes dislodged by white homesteaders, the Delaware and the Shawnee, to resettle. The confederacy\u2014which included other Great Lakes and Algonquin tribes as well\u2014began sending war parties to raid settlers, hoping to drive them back across the Appalachian Mountains, and refused to meet for negotiations over a possible treaty to instead cede land for white settlement. The growing violence led to the Northwest Indian War.\nIn 1790, President George Washington ordered the United States Army to conquer and pacify the tribes. The first expedition, led by General Josiah Harmar reached Kekionga and burned it, but was then driven off by confederacy warriors led by the Miami war chief Little Turtle. The confederacy attacked the second invading force, led in 1791 by General Arthur St. Clair, before it could get that far and wiped it out, in a massacre known as St. Clair's Defeat at modern-day Fort Recovery, Ohio. General Anthony Wayne led a third expedition, defeating the confederacy's warriors at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, near modern-day Toledo, Ohio on August 20, 1794. Wayne's men then marched up the Maumee River, systematically burning evacuated native towns, crops and winter food stores, until they reached its headwaters, where Kekionga was remained in ruins. Wayne ordered Fort Wayne built there to permanently occupy the area.\nThe following year, Wayne negotiated a peace accord, the Treaty of Greenville with tribal leaders, in which they agreed to stop fighting and ceded most of what is now Ohio along with certain tracts further west, including the area around Fort Wayne encompassing Kekionga and the land portage. Wayne promised the remainder would remain Indian lands, which is why the territory west of Ohio was named Indiana. In subsequent years, the government used Fort Wayne to hand out annual payments under the treaty. But in a recurring cycle, the tribes ran up debts to white traders who came there to sell them alcohol and manufactured goods, and the government pushed tribal leaders\u2014including through bribes\u2014to sell more reservation land to pay off those debts and, when the land was gone, then to agree to have the tribe removed to the Far West.\nSettlement permitted by Treaty of St. Mary's.\nThe first settlement started in 1815. In 1819, the military garrison abandoned the fort and moved to Detroit. In 1822, a federal land office opened to sell land ceded by local Native Americans by the Treaty of St. Mary's in 1818. Platted in 1823 at the Ewing Tavern, the village became an important frontier outpost, and was incorporated as the Town of Fort Wayne in 1829, with a population of 300. The Wabash and Erie Canal's opening improved travel conditions to the Great Lakes and Mississippi River, exposing Fort Wayne to expanded economic opportunities. The population topped 2,000 when the town was incorporated as the City of Fort Wayne on February 22, 1840. Pioneer newspaperman George W. Wood was elected the city's first mayor. Fort Wayne's \"Summit City\" nickname dates from this period, referring to the city's position at the highest elevation along the canal's route. As influential as the canal was to the city's earliest development, it quickly became obsolete after briefly competing with the city's first railroad, the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway, completed in 1854.\nModern history.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, the city's population reached nearly 50,000, attributed to a large influx of German and Irish immigrants. Fort Wayne's \"urban working class\" thrived in industrial and railroad-related jobs. The city's economy was substantially based on manufacturing, ushering in an era of innovation with several notable inventions and developments coming out of the city over the years, such as gasoline pumps (1885), the refrigerator (1913), and in 1972, the first home video game console. A 1913 flood caused seven deaths, left 15,000 homeless, and damaged over 5,500 buildings in the worst natural disaster in the city's history.\nAs the automobile's prevalence grew, Fort Wayne became a fixture on the Lincoln Highway. Aviation arrived in 1919 with the opening of the city's first airport, Smith Field. The airport served as Fort Wayne's primary commercial airfield until Baer Field (now Fort Wayne International Airport) was transferred to the city in 1947 after serving as a military base during World War II.\nFort Wayne was hit by the Great Depression beginning in 1929, with most factories cutting their workforce. The stock market crash did not discourage plans to build the city's first skyscraper and Indiana's tallest building at the time, the Lincoln Bank Tower. By 1935, the New Deal's WPA put over 7,000 residents back to work through local infrastructure improvements, including the construction of new parks, bridges, viaducts, and a $5.2 million sewage treatment facility.\nThe helped the city prosper once again. Between 1950 and 1955, more than 5,000 homes were built, many in large subdivisions in rural Allen County. In 1950, Fort Wayne's first bypass, Coliseum Boulevard, opened on the north side of the city, followed by the city's first arena, War Memorial Coliseum, bringing new opportunities for suburban expansion. The Coliseum was home to the NBA's from 1952 to 1957. The opening of enclosed shopping malls and the construction of Interstate 69 through rural areas north and west of the city proper further drove the exodus of retail from downtown through the 1960s. According to the Fort Wayne Home Builders Association estimates, more than 80 percent of new home construction occurred outside the city proper in the 1970s.\nLike many cities in the Rust Belt, deindustrialization in the 1980s brought urban blight, increased crime, and a decrease in blue-collar manufacturing jobs. Downtown and surrounding neighborhoods continued declining as residents and businesses sprawled further into rural Allen County. A 1982 flood forced an evacuation of 9,000 residents, damaging 2,000 buildings, and costing $56.1 million (1982 USD, $137 million 2015 USD), prompting a visit from then president of the United States, Ronald Reagan.\nThe 1990s marked a turnaround for the city, as local leaders focused on crime reduction, economic diversification, and downtown redevelopment. By 1999, Fort Wayne's crime rate decreased to levels not seen since 1974, and the city's economy recovered, with the unemployment rate hovering at 2.4 percent in 1998. Clearing blighted buildings downtown resulted in new public greenspaces, including Headwaters Park, which has become the premier community gathering space and centerpiece in the city's $50 million flood control project. Fort Wayne celebrated its bicentennial in 1994.\nThe city continued to concentrate on downtown redevelopment and investment in the 2000s. The decade saw the beginnings of its transformation, with renovations and expansions of the Allen County Public Library, Grand Wayne Convention Center, and Fort Wayne Museum of Art. In 2007, the $130 million Harrison Square development was launched, creating Parkview Field. Suburban growth continued, with the opening of Fort Wayne's first lifestyle center, Jefferson Pointe, and the half-billion dollar Parkview Regional Medical Center in 2012.\nGeography.\nFort Wayne is in the East North Central region of the Midwestern United States, in northeastern Indiana, west of Ohio and south of Michigan. According to the 2010 census, Fort Wayne has a total area of , of which (or 99.81%) is land and (or 0.19%) is water.\nTopography.\nFor a regional summit, the city is situated on flat land characterized by little topographical relief, a result of the Wisconsin glaciation episode. Receding glaciers eroded the land, depositing an evenly distributed layer of sediment during the last glacial period. The most distinguishable topographical feature is Cedar Creek Canyon, just north of the city proper near Huntertown. The Fort Wayne Moraine follows two of the city's three rivers: the St. Marys and St. Joseph. The two rivers converge to form the Maumee, which eventually empties into Lake Erie. Land east of the moraine includes the former Great Black Swamp, a lacustrine plain formed by Glacial Lake Maumee. The Little River flows southwest of Fort Wayne, a tributary of the Wabash River, and remnant of the Maumee Torrent. The city lies along the St. Lawrence Continental Divide which separates the Great Lakes Basin from the Gulf of Mexico watershed.\nThe most important geographical feature of the area is the short distance overland between the Three Rivers system, which eventually flows to the Atlantic, and the Wabash system, which eventually flows to the Gulf of Mexico. This came to be the \"portage\" or carrying place, over which travelers could transport their cargoes from one system to the next. This natural crossroads attracted the Native Americans for thousands of years. It later attracted the European explorers and traders and the American pioneer settlers who continued to develop the area as a transportation and communications center. Chief Little Turtle of the Miami Nation expressed its importance eloquently at the treaty of Greenville in 1795 when he called it \"that glorious gate...through which all the words of our chiefs had to pass through from north to south and from east to west\".\nFort Wayne's urban tree canopy is 29 percent, double the state average of 14.5 percent and above the national average of 27.1 percent. The canopy is decreasing, notably from development and the emerald ash borer infestation. Fort Wayne has been designated a Tree City USA since 1990.\nCityscape.\nHistorically, Fort Wayne has been divided into four unofficial quadrants: northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest. Calhoun Street divides the southwest and southeast, while the St. Joseph River divides the northwest and northeast quadrants. The Maumee River separates the northeast and southeast, while portions of the St. Marys River and Chicago, Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad separate the northwest and southwest quadrants.\nFort Wayne's early-20th century development was influenced by the City Beautiful movement and centered on a \"park and boulevard plan\" conceived by urban planner Charles Mulford Robinson in 1909 and finalized by landscape architect George Kessler in 1912. The master plan proposed a network of parkways and boulevards connecting the city's three rivers and Spy Run Creek to dozens of neighborhoods and parks. Several parks were designed by noted landscape architect Arthur Asahel Shurcliff. Much of the original plan was implemented by 1955. In 2010, the Fort Wayne Park and Boulevard System was listed on the National Register of Historic Places, consisting of 11 public parks, four parkways, and ten boulevards, covering .\nArchitecture.\nDuring the 19th century, Fort Wayne was dominated by Greek Revival, Gothic Revival, and Italianate architecture. Examples of Greek Revival architecture remain in the city, with one being the Richardville House (1827), a National Historic Landmark. Gothic and Gothic Revival architecture can be found in some of the city's most prominent churches, including Trinity English Lutheran Church (1846), Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (1860), Trinity Episcopal Church (1865), and Saint Paul's Evangelical Lutheran Church (1889).\nPopular early-20th century architectural styles found in the city include Queen Anne, Richardsonian Romanesque, Neoclassical, Colonial Revival, Dutch Colonial Revival, Tudor Revival, Prairie, American Craftsman, American Foursquare, and Art Deco. Richardsonian Romanesque buildings include Fort Wayne City Hall (1893) and John H. Bass Mansion (1902), each designed by Wing &amp; Mahurin. Notable examples of Neoclassical architecture include the Masonic Temple (1926) and North Side High School (1927). Beaux-Arts, an architectural style closely related to Neoclassical, gained popularity during the City Beautiful movement of the 1890s and early 1900s, which is reflected in the Allen County Courthouse (1902). The Allen County Courthouse is one of two National Historic Landmarks in the city. The Pennsylvania Railroad Station, also known as Baker Street Station (1914), was designed in American Craftsman style. At , the Art Deco-style Lincoln Bank Tower was Fort Wayne's first high-rise and Indiana's tallest building from 1930 to 1962. The E. Ross Adair Federal Building and United States Courthouse (1932) is another example of Art Deco architecture. Williams\u2013Woodland Park Historic District includes examples of Queen Anne and Colonial Revival residential homes, while the Forest Park Boulevard Historic District includes Tudor Revival homes.\nModern and Postmodern architecture can be found in buildings constructed during the second half of the 20th century in Fort Wayne. The John D. Haynes House (1952) was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, while the campus of Concordia Theological Seminary (1953) was designed by Eero Saarinen. Postmodern architect Michael Graves' first commissions were built in the city, including Hanselmann House (1967) and Snyderman House (1972, now demolished). Louis Kahn's design for the Arts United Center (1973) was inspired by a violin and its case. Other notable buildings include Indiana Michigan Power Center (1982), the tallest building in the city and tallest building in Indiana outside of Indianapolis, at .\nClimate.\nFort Wayne lies in the humid continental climate zone (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfa\"), experiencing four distinct seasons. The city is located in USDA hardiness zones 5b and 6a. Typically, summers are hot, humid, and wet. Winters are generally cold with moderate snowfall. The average annual precipitation is , recorded at Fort Wayne International Airport. During the winter season, snowfall accumulation averages per year. Lake-effect snow is not uncommon to the region, but usually appears in the form of light snow flurries.\nThe National Weather Service reports the highest recorded temperature in the city at , most recently on June 28, 2012, and the lowest recorded temperature at on January 12, 1918. The wettest month on record was June 2015, with of precipitation. The greatest 24-hour rainfall was on August 1, 1926. The snowiest month on record was January 2014, with of snowfall. The greatest calendar-day snowfall was on February 28, 1900.\nSevere weather is not uncommon, particularly in the spring and summer months; the city experiences an average of 39 thunderstorm days and about 10 severe weather days annually. An F2 tornado struck northern Fort Wayne on May 26, 2001, injuring three and causing damage along the Coliseum Boulevard corridor and a subdivision. Fort Wayne experienced wind gusts in the June 2012 North American derecho, knocking out power to 78,000, uprooting approximately 500 trees, and costing $2.5 million.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2010 Census, there were 420,690 people and 113,541 households. The racial makeup of the city is 73.62% White, 15.41% Black or African American, 0.37% Native American or Alaska Native, 3.3% Asian (1.4% Burmese, 0.4% Indian, 0.3% Vietnamese, 0.2% Chinese, 0.2% Filipino, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Laotian, 0.1% Thai), 0.06% Pacific Islander, 3.72% from other races, and 3.52% from two or more races. 7.96% of the population are Hispanic or Latino of any race. Among the Hispanic population, 6.1% are Mexican, 0.4% Puerto Rican, and 0.3% Guatemalan. Non-Hispanic Whites were 70.3% of the population in 2010, down from 87.7% in 1970.\nThere were 101,585 households, of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.3% were married couples living together, 14.8% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.9% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.0% were non-families. 31.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.09.\nThe median age in the city was 34.5 years. 26.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 10.2% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.5% were from 25 to 44; 24.9% were from 45 to 64; and 12% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.4% male and 51.6% female.\nFort Wayne has the largest Burmese American population in the U.S., estimated at 6,000. Burmese refugee settlement and \"secondary migrants\" doubled the city's Asian population between 2000 and 2010.\nReligion.\nFort Wayne is sometimes referred to as the \"City of Churches\", an unofficial moniker dating to the late-19th century when the city was the regional hub of Catholic, Lutheran, and Episcopal faiths. Today, there are 360 churches in the city. 54 percent of Fort Wayne residents identify as religious, where 16 percent are Catholic, 9 percent are Lutheran, 6.5 percent are Baptist, 5 percent are Methodist, and 0.14 percent are Jewish, with 16.5 percent adhering to other Christian faiths. An increasing religious minority is found among the city's immigrant communities, including Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.\nMajor churches include the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, Saint Paul's Evangelical Lutheran Church and Trinity Episcopal Church. Fort Wayne's Reform Judaism population is served by Congregation Achduth Vesholom, the oldest Jewish congregation in Indiana, founded in 1848. In 2013, construction began on the first Burmese Muslim mosque to be built worldwide since the mid-1970s.\nAs of December 2012, four national Christian denominations were headquartered in the city: the American Association of Lutheran Churches, the Fundamental Baptist Fellowship Association, the Missionary Church and the Fellowship of Evangelical Churches. Fort Wayne is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne\u2013South Bend, covering 14 counties in Northern Indiana, and the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod Indiana District, encompassing all of Indiana and north central Kentucky.\nEconomy.\nIn 2017, the Fort Wayne metropolitan area had a gross domestic product (GDP) of $25.7 billion. The top four industries were: manufacturing ($8.1B), health care ($2.54B), retail trade ($1.4B), and finance and insurance ($1.3B) Government, if it had been a private industry, would have tied for third, generating $1.4 billion.\nManufacturing is deeply rooted in Fort Wayne's economic history, dating to the earliest days of the city's growth as an important trade stop along the Wabash and Erie Canal. Railroads, introduced shortly after the canal's arrival, eased travel from Fort Wayne to other booming industrial centers along the Great Lakes, such as Chicago, Detroit, Toledo, and Cleveland. Throughout the early and mid-20th century, manufacturing dominated the city's economic landscape. From 1900 to 1930, Fort Wayne's industrial output expanded by 747 percent, with total production valued at $95 million in 1929, up from $11 million in 1899. The total workforce also increased from 18,000 in 1900 to nearly 50,000 in 1930.\nCompanies that had a significant presence in the city include Dana Holding Corporation, Falstaff Brewing Corporation, Fruehauf Corporation, General Electric, International Harvester, Magnavox, Old Crown Brewing Corporation, and Tokheim, among several others, producing goods such as refrigerators, washing machines, automatic phonographs, meat packing products, televisions, garbage disposals, automotive parts and motors, trailers, gasoline pumps, trucks, beer, tents and awnings. Magnet wire production became an especially vital component to the city's economy. In 1960, Fort Wayne was at the center of the United States magnet wire industry, home to New Haven Wire and Cable Company, Phelps Dodge, Rea Magnet Wire, Superior Essex, and an operation at General Electric, producing nearly 90 percent of North America's magnet wire.\nThe 1970s and 1980s were times of economic depression in Fort Wayne, when much of the city's manufacturing foundation eroded and the blue-collar workforce shrank. Fort Wayne joined several other cities reeling economically within the Rust Belt. At the same time, General Electric also downsized much of its more than 10,000-person workforce. Amid other area plant closures and downsizing, coupled with the early 1980s recession, the city lost 30,000 jobs and reached a 12.1 percent unemployment rate. The arrival of General Motors in 1987 helped fill the void from shuttered manufacturers and aided in the area's recovery, employing 3,000 at its Fort Wayne Assembly. In 2017, General Motors was the largest manufacturer in the city, employing 4,100 assembling Chevrolet Silverado regular and double cab light- and heavy-duty pickup trucks.\nThrough the 1990s and into the 2000s, the city diversified its economy; manufacturing now employs 16.9 percent of Allen County's workforce. Other sectors include distribution, transportation, and logistics (23.1 percent), health care (17.9 percent), professional and business services (12.1 percent), leisure and hospitality (11.1 percent), and financial services (6.3 percent). The leisure and hospitality sector has especially grown, with 5.8 million visitors spending $545 million in 2013, a 4.3 percent increase over the previous year. The city is a center for the defense industry, employing thousands at such companies as BAE Systems (1,150), Harris Corporation (888), Raytheon Systems (950), and the Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station (423).\nDespite economic diversification, the city was significantly impacted by the Great Recession. According to a report from Pew Research Center, the city lost nearly a quarter of its manufacturing jobs and 11% of its economic status between 2000 and 2014. Economic Innovation Group's 2016 Distressed Communities Index Report ranked Fort Wayne among the most unequal large cities in the U.S. in terms of linking economic opportunities to its distressed zip codes. , Allen County's labor force was 180,637 with an unemployment rate of 2.5 percent.\nCompanies based in Fort Wayne include Brotherhood Mutual, Do it Best, Franklin Electric, Frontier Communications \u2013 Central Region, Genteq, Indiana Michigan Power, K&amp;K Insurance, MedPro Group, North American Van Lines, Rea Magnet Wire, Steel Dynamics, Sweetwater Sound, and Vera Bradley. Steel Dynamics is the only Fortune 500 company headquartered in the city, ranking 354th. Founded in 1905, Lincoln Financial Group was based in Fort Wayne until its move to suburban Philadelphia in 1999. The company maintains a large presence in the city, employing nearly 2,000.\nCulture.\nPerforming arts.\nThe Embassy Theatre is a 2,471-seat performing arts theater which hosts over 200,000 patrons annually. Since its founding in 1944, the Fort Wayne Philharmonic Orchestra has often been hosted at the Embassy. The University of Saint Francis Robert Goldstine Performing Arts Center, located on its Downtown Campus, contains a 2,086-seat auditorium.\nSince its establishment in 2010, the Cultural District has been home to several of the city's cultural institutions, including the Fort Wayne Museum of Art, Auer Center for Arts and Culture, Arts United Center, and Hall Community Arts Center. Arts United Center houses the Fort Wayne Civic Theater, Fort Wayne Dance Collective, and Fort Wayne Youtheatre. Auer Center for Arts and Culture houses Fort Wayne Ballet. Hall Community Arts Center houses Cinema Center, an independent film venue.\nThough used mainly for exhibitions and conventions, the Grand Wayne Convention Center hosts dance and choir productions, such as the annual Foundation for Art and Music in Education (FAME) Northeast Festival. Foellinger Theatre, a 2,500-seat amphitheater in Franke Park, hosts seasonal acts and outdoor concerts during warmer months. Located west of downtown, Arena Dinner Theatre is a nonprofit community arts corporation with a focus on live theater production, annually hosting seven full-length theatrical productions.\nAttractions.\nThe Fort Wayne Children's Zoo has been lauded as one of the nation's foremost zoos. Covering and containing 1,000 animals of 200 different species, the zoo is the largest regional attraction, regularly drawing over 500,000 visitors annually. The Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory gardens cover , displaying over 1,200 plants of 502 different species and 72 types of cacti. Science Central, an interactive science center, contains permanent displays and temporary exhibits, drawing 130,000 visitors annually.\nEstablished in 1921, the Fort Wayne Museum of Art (FWMoA) is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, specializing in the collection and exhibition of American art. The FWMoA annually receives 100,000 visitors.\nThe History Center, located in Fort Wayne's Old City Hall, manages a collection of more than 23,000 artifacts recalling the region's history. The center is overseen by the Allen County\u2013Fort Wayne Historical Society, which maintains the Richardville House, one of two National Historic Landmarks in the city. Historic Fort Wayne, a replica of the 1815 fortification, hosts scheduled tours and historical reenactments throughout the year. Other cultural museums include the African/African\u2013American Historical Museum, Fort Wayne Firefighters Museum, Greater Fort Wayne Aviation Museum, and Baer Field Heritage Air Park.\nThe Allen County Public Library's Fred J. Reynolds Historical Genealogy Department is the second-largest genealogy collection in North America. The collection contains 350,000 printed volumes and 513,000 items of microfilm and microfiche.\nFestivals and events.\nThe city hosts a variety of cultural festivals and events annually. Festivals commemorating ethnic food, dance, music, and art include Germanfest, Greek Festival, and Japanese Cherry Blossom Festival. Initiated in 1997, Fort Wayne Pride celebrates northeast Indiana's LGBTQ community. BBQ RibFest showcases barbecue rib cooks and live entertainment, attracting 40,000 visitors annually.\nFort4Fitness is a certified half marathon, run/walk, and health fair. Over 9,000 participated in the 2011 half marathon. In 2012, Fort4Fitness debuted a spring cycle, Bike-the-Fort, which included three bicycling tours with over 1,000 participants. HolidayFest begins with the Night of Lights on Thanksgiving eve, with the lighting of the PNC Santa and Reindeer, Wells Fargo Holiday Display, and Indiana Michigan Power Christmas Wreath, ending with a fireworks finale at Parkview Field.\nThe largest annual events in the city are the Johnny Appleseed Festival, Taste of the Arts, Middlewaves and the Three Rivers Festival. The Johnny Appleseed Festival draws 300,000 visitors. The festival is held at Johnny Appleseed Park, where American folklore legend John Chapman is believed to be buried. Apple-themed cuisine, crafts, and historical demonstrations recalling 19th century American pioneering are among some of the festival's events. Three Rivers Festival, a celebration of Fort Wayne, spans nine days each July, attracting 400,000 visitors. Three Rivers features over 200 events, including a parade, midway, hot dog eating contest, bed race, raft race, arts fair, and fireworks spectacular. Other annual events include the Allen County Fair, BAALS Music Festival, National Soccer Festival, and the Vera Bradley Outlet Sale.\nSports.\nFort Wayne is home to three minor league sports franchises: the ECHL's Fort Wayne Komets, the Midwest League's Fort Wayne TinCaps, and the NBA G League's Fort Wayne Mad Ants who are owned and operated by their parent club, the Indiana Pacers. \nFort Wayne also hosts the Fort Wayne Derby Girls of the Women's Flat Track Derby Association Division 2. These teams compete at the Allen County War Memorial Coliseum. Parkview Field is home to the TinCaps.\nThe city has been home to other professional sports franchises, including the National Basketball Association's Fort Wayne Pistons (which moved to Detroit in 1957), the Fort Wayne Daisies of the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League, and the Fort Wayne Kekiongas of the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (precursor to Major League Baseball).\nIntercollegiate sports in the city include the Purdue Fort Wayne Mastodons, representing Purdue University Fort Wayne (PFW) in the NCAA's Division I Horizon League, and NAIA schools Indiana Tech (Wolverine\u2013Hoosier Athletic Conference) and University of Saint Francis (Crossroads League and Mid-States Football Association). The Mastodons had represented Indiana University \u2013 Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW) prior to its 2018 split into two separate institutions (see below), and from 2016 to 2018 were branded as the Fort Wayne Mastodons, but the athletic brand was changed to \"Purdue Fort Wayne\" shortly before the split took effect.\nSome notable events in sports history occurred in Fort Wayne. On June 2, 1883, Fort Wayne hosted the Quincy Professionals for one of the first lighted evening baseball games ever recorded. Fort Wayne is also credited as the birthplace of the NBA, as Pistons' coach Carl Bennett brokered the merger of the BAA and the NBL in 1948 from his Alexander Street home. On March 10, 1961, Wilt Chamberlain became the first player in the NBA to reach 3,000 points in a single season while competing at the War Memorial Coliseum.\nParks and recreation.\nFort Wayne Parks and Recreation maintains 86 public parks totaling . Three public and 20 private golf courses are located in Allen County. Franke Park is the most extensive city park, covering . Franke is home to the Foellinger Theatre, Shoaff Lake, and the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo. Other notable parks include Johnny Appleseed Park (home to a campground and John Chapman's grave) and McCulloch Park (home to Samuel Bigger's grave). Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory, Headwaters Park, Lawton Skatepark, and Historic Fort Wayne are located downtown. Hurshtown Reservoir, near Grabill, is the largest body of water in Allen County and is popular with watersports enthusiasts for sailing and fishing. Some 300 lakes are located within of the city. Located downtown along the St. Marys River, Fort Wayne Outfitters offers canoe, kayak, stand-up paddle board, and pontoon boat rentals for recreation along the three rivers.\nStarting in the 1970s, the city developed a system of recreational trails along the riverbanks, known as the Rivergreenway, with the aim of beautifying the riverfronts and promoting active lifestyles for residents. The Rivergreenway was designated a National Recreation Trail in 2009. As of 2018, the Rivergreenway had expanded with additional trails to encompass nearly throughout the city and county, with about 550,000 annual users. With the expansion of trails in recent years, cycling has become an emerging mode of transportation for residents. In 2009, the city's first bicycle lanes were established with the installation of 250 bike parking places. In 2016, Fort Wayne was designated a Bronze Level bicycle friendly community by the League of American Bicyclists.\nAccording to the Trust for Public Land's 2017 ParkScore Index, some 56% of Fort Wayne residents are underserved.\nGovernment.\nFort Wayne has a mayor\u2013council government. The mayor, city clerk, and city council members serve four-year terms.\nFort Wayne's mayor is Tom Henry, a Democrat, who was elected in 2007. Henry succeeded Democrat Graham Richard who chose not to run for re-election after two terms as mayor. Henry was re-elected to a third term in 2015. Karl Bandemer was appointed deputy mayor in 2013. Lana Keesling was elected city clerk in 2015. Fort Wayne City Council has nine elected members, one representative from each of the city's six council districts and three at-large members, serving four-year terms.\nThe city is represented in the Indiana General Assembly by three Senate Districts and seven House Districts. Fort Wayne's state senators include Dennis Kruse (14th District), Liz Brown (15th), and David Long (16th). Representatives include Dan Leonard (50th District), Ben Smaltz (52nd), Phil GiaQuinta (80th), Martin Carbaugh (81st), Christopher Judy (83rd), Bob Morris (84th), and Dave Heine (85th). Federally, Fort Wayne is part of Indiana's 3rd congressional district, represented by Republican Jim Banks, who was first elected in 2016.\nUnder the Unigov provision of Indiana Law, Fort Wayne would have automatically consolidated with Allen County when its population exceeded 250,000, previously the minimum population for a first class city in Indiana. Fort Wayne nearly met the state requirements for first class city designation on January 1, 2006 when of neighboring Aboite Township (and a small section of Wayne Township) including 25,094 people were annexed. However, a 2004 legislative change raised the population threshold for first-class status from 250,000 to 600,000, which ensured Indianapolis' status as the only first class city in Indiana.\nFort Wayne's E. Ross Adair Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse houses the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana, which was authorized by Congress in 1928.\nMunicipal and state laws are enforced by the Fort Wayne Police Department, an organization of 460 officers. In 2006, Fort Wayne's crime rate was 5104.1 per 100,000 people, slightly above the national average of 4479.3. There were 18 murders, 404 robberies, and 2,128 burglaries in 2006. Steve Reed was appointed to the position of police chief in 2016. In 2014, former police chief Rusty York was appointed to the position of director of public safety. York previously served as police chief from 2000 to 2014.\nAs of 2010, the Fort Wayne Fire Department included 375 uniformed firefighters and 18 fire stations. Eric Lahey was appointed fire chief in 2014.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nFort Wayne Community Schools (FWCS) is the largest public school district in Indiana, enrolling 30,981 students as of the 2013\u20132014 academic year. FWCS operate 51 facilities, including 31 elementary schools, ten middle schools, and five high schools. The student body is diverse, with 75 spoken languages in the district. East Allen County Schools (EACS) operate 20 schools, with a total enrollment of 9,114. Northwest Allen County Schools (NACS) operate seven elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school, with a total enrollment of 6,853. Southwest Allen County Schools (SACS) operate six elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school, with a total enrollment of 6,995. Private primary and secondary education is offered largely through Lutheran Schools of Indiana and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne\u2013South Bend. Amish Parochial Schools of Indiana has schools through eighth grade in rural eastern Allen County.\nHigher education.\nFort Wayne hosts institutions affiliated with both of Indiana's major state university systems. Indiana University Fort Wayne (IU Fort Wayne) and Purdue University Fort Wayne (PFW) were established in July 2018 after the dissolution of Indiana University \u2013 Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW), which had enrolled over 13,000 students prior to its closure and was the state's fifth-largest public university. IPFW's degree programs in health sciences are now operated by IU Fort Wayne; as such, that institution is now home to the Fort Wayne Center for Medical Education, a branch of the Indiana University School of Medicine. All remaining IPFW degree programs were taken over by PFW.\nIvy Tech Community College of Indiana also contains two campuses in the city. Three private universities are located in the city, including Concordia Theological Seminary, Indiana Institute of Technology, and the University of Saint Francis. Private universities with regional branches in Fort Wayne include Crossroads Bible College, Grace College and Theological Seminary, Huntington University, Indiana Wesleyan University, Manchester University College of Pharmacy, and Trine University. For-profit institutions include Harrison College and International Business College.\nLibraries.\nComposed of 14 branches, the Allen County Public Library is among the 20 largest public libraries in the U.S., and ranks 89th factoring in academic libraries, with 3.4 million volumes. The library's foundation is also among the nation's largest, with $14 million in assets. The entire library system underwent an $84.1 million overhaul from 2002 to 2007. In 2009, over 7.4 million materials were borrowed by patrons, with over 3 million visits made throughout the library system.\nMedia.\nMajor broadcasting network affiliates include WANE-TV (CBS), WPTA-TV (ABC/NBC), WISE-TV (CW), WFFT-TV (Fox), and WFWA-TV (PBS), Northeast Indiana's PBS member station. Religious broadcasters include WINM and W07CL. Access Fort Wayne maintains Fort Wayne and Allen County's Public Access capabilities serving from the Allen County Public Library. Two National Public Radio stations are based in the city, WBNI and WBOI with the new WELT Community Radio Station transmitting from the Allen County Public Library.\nFort Wayne is served by two primary newspapers, the \"Journal Gazette\" and Pulitzer Prize-winning \"News-Sentinel\". The two dailies have separate editorial departments, but under a joint operating agreement, printing, advertising, and circulation are handled by Fort Wayne Newspapers, Inc. The \"News-Sentinel\" announced that it would cease printing operations in favor of digital publishing in August 2017.\"\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nFort Wayne includes two municipal airports, both managed by the Fort Wayne\u2013Allen County Airport Authority. Fort Wayne International Airport (FWA) is the city's primary commercial airport, with five airlines offering direct service to 13 domestic connections. The airport is Indiana's second busiest, with over 350,000 passenger enplanements in 2015. Fort Wayne International is also home to the 122d Fighter Wing's Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station. Smith Field, in northern Fort Wayne, is used primarily for general aviation.\nFort Wayne is served by a single Interstate, (Interstate 69), along with an auxiliary beltway (Interstate 469). Once the State Road 37 expressway between Bloomington and Martinsville is completed in 2018, filling a gap in I-69 that exists south of Indianapolis, the road will run south to Evansville; it currently runs north to the Canada\u2013United States border at Port Huron, Michigan. In the coming years, I-69 will extend to the US\u2013Mexico border in Texas, with branches ending in Laredo, Pharr, and Brownsville. Four U.S. Routes bisect the city, including US\u00a024, US\u00a027, US\u00a030, and US\u00a033.\nFive Indiana State Roads also meet in the city, including State Road 1, State Road 3, State Road 14, State Road 37, and State Road 930. Airport Expressway, a four-lane divided highway, links Fort Wayne International Airport directly to I-69. About 85 percent of residents commute alone by personal vehicle, while another eight percent carpool.\nUnlike most cities comparable to its size, Fort Wayne does not have an urban freeway system. In 1946, planners proposed a $27 million federally funded freeway, crossing east\u2013west and north\u2013south through downtown. Opponents successfully campaigned against the proposal, objecting to the demolition of nearly 1,500 homes at the time of the post-World War II housing shortage, while playing on fears that the project would force displaced minorities into white neighborhoods. In 1947, Fort Wayne residents voted down the referendum that would have allowed for its construction, dubbed the 'Anthony Wayne Parkway.' Beginning in 1962, construction commenced for I-69 in suburban Fort Wayne.\nThe I-469 beltway around the southern and eastern fringes of Fort Wayne and New Haven was constructed between 1988 and 1995 as the largest public works project in Allen County history, at $207 million.\nAmtrak's \"Capitol Limited\" (Chicago - Toledo - Cleveland - Pittsburgh - Washington, D.C.) and Amtrak's \"Lake Shore Limited\" (Chicago - Toledo - Cleveland - Buffalo - Albany - split to Boston and to New York City) are the closest passenger rail services to Fort Wayne, located north at Waterloo Station. Service by Amtrak ended in 1990 when the \"Broadway Limited\" was rerouted away from Fort Wayne's Pennsylvania Station. Until 1961 the Pennsylvania Railroad operated the north\u2013south \"Northern Arrow\" through the station. Other stations in Fort Wayne served the passenger trains of the Chicago, Indianapolis, and Louisville Railway ('Monon Railroad') and the Wabash Railroad (hosting the east\u2013west \"Wabash Cannon Ball).\"\nThere has been a movement to bring direct passenger rail service back in the form of Amtrak or high-speed rail service. In 2013, a feasibility study was published outlining the impacts of a proposed Columbus\u2014Fort Wayne\u2014Chicago high-speed rail corridor. At , the route would cost $1.29 billion and generate some $7.1 billion in economic benefits to the region. Freight service is provided by a class I railroad (Norfolk Southern) and two class III railroads. Fort Wayne is headquarters and main operations hub of Norfolk Southern's Triple Crown Services subsidiary, the largest truckload shipper in the U.S.\nFort Wayne's mass transit system is managed by the Fort Wayne Public Transportation Corporation (Citilink), providing 12 bus routes through the cities of Fort Wayne and New Haven via downtown's Central Station. CampusLink debuted in 2009 as a free shuttle service for students, faculty, and general public traveling between Ivy Tech's Coliseum and North campuses, IPFW and its student housing on the Waterfield Campus, and shopping and residential areas. MedLink debuted in 2013 connecting Parkview Regional Medical Center with Parkview Health's Randallia campus. Despite annual ridership of 2.2 million, less than one percent of residents commute by public transportation. Fort Wayne is served by two intercity bus providers: Greyhound Lines (Indianapolis\u2014Toledo\u2014Detroit) and Lakefront Lines (Chicago\u2014Columbus\u2014Akron).\nIn 2016, the city introduced its first bike-sharing program, including five stations and 25 bicycles.\nHealthcare.\nFort Wayne is served by ten medical centers belonging to one of two regional healthcare providers in the city: Parkview Health System and Lutheran Health Network. Notable hospitals include Dupont Hospital, Lutheran Hospital of Indiana, Parkview Regional Medical Center, Parkview Hospital Randallia, and St. Joseph Hospital. Over 1,600 patient beds are available throughout the city's healthcare system. , both healthcare systems were the city's first and second largest employers, respectively, and contribute to a total healthcare workforce in Allen County of 34,000. VA Northern Indiana Health Care System's Fort Wayne Campus provides medical services through the Department of Veterans Affairs.\nUtilities.\nCity Utilities is the largest municipally owned water utility in Indiana, supplying residents with of water per day from the St. Joseph River via the Three Rivers Water Filtration Plant. Sanitary sewer treatment is also managed by City Utilities. The City of Fort Wayne offers full curbside recycling and solid waste collection services for residents, presently contracted through Red River Waste Solutions. Electricity is provided by Indiana Michigan Power, a subsidiary of American Electric Power, while natural gas is supplied by Northern Indiana Public Service Company (NIPSCO), a subsidiary of NiSource. All tier 1 networks and several additional telecommunication service providers cover the Fort Wayne rate area.\nSister cities.\nFort Wayne has four sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International:\nFriendship city"}
{"id": "11236", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11236", "title": "Fart (word)", "text": "Fart is a word in the English language most commonly used in reference to flatulence that can be used as a noun or a verb. The immediate roots are in the Middle English words \"ferten\", \"feortan\" and \"farten\", kin of the Old High German word \"ferzan\". Cognates are found in Old Norse, Slavic and also Greek and Sanskrit. The word \"fart\" has been incorporated into the colloquial and technical speech of a number of occupations, including computing. It is often considered unsuitable in formal situations as it may be considered vulgar or offensive.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"fart\" is one of the oldest words in the English lexicon. Its Indo-European origins are confirmed by the many cognate words in some other Indo-European languages: It is cognate with Greek verb \u03c0\u03ad\u03c1\u03b4\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 (perdomai), as well as the Latin \"p\u0113d\u0115re\", Sanskrit \"pardate\", Avestan , Italian , French \"p\u00e9ter\", Russian \u043f\u0435\u0440\u0434\u0435\u0442\u044c (perdet') and Polish \"\" \u00ab PIE * [break wind loudly] or * [the same, softly], all of which mean the same thing. Like most Indo-European roots in the Germanic languages, it was altered under Grimm's law, so that Indo-European \"/p/\" &gt; \"/f/\", and \"/d/\" &gt; \"/t/\", as the German cognate \"furzen\" also manifests.\nVulgarity and offensiveness.\nIn certain circles the word is considered merely a common profanity with an often humorous connotation. For example, a person may be referred to as a 'fart', or an 'old fart', not necessarily depending on the person's age. This may convey the sense that a person is boring or unduly fussy and be intended as an insult, mainly when used in the second or third person. For example, '\"he's a boring old fart!\" However the word may be used as a colloquial term of endearment or in an attempt at humorous self-deprecation (e.g., in such phrases as \"I know I'm just an old fart\" or \"you do like to fart about!\"). 'Fart' is often only used as a term of endearment when the subject is personally well known to the user.\nIn both cases though, it tends to refer to personal habits or traits that the user considers to be a negative feature of the subject, even when it is a self-reference. For example, when concerned that a person is being overly methodical they might say 'I know I'm being an old fart', potentially to forestall negative thoughts and opinions in others. When used in an attempt to be offensive, the word is still considered vulgar, but it remains a mild example of such an insult. This usage dates back to the Medieval period, where the phrase 'not worth a fart' would be applied to an item held to be worthless. Whilst being accused of farting may be offensive, other phrasal descriptions of flatulent discharge, in phrases such as, \"Have you dropped your guts?\", \"Have you blown one off\" or \"Who shit?\" are certainly no less so.\nHistorical examples.\nThe word \"fart\" in Middle English occurs in \"Sumer Is Icumen In\", where one sign of summer is \"bucke uerte\u00fe\" (the buck farts). It appears in several of Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". In \"The Miller's Tale\", Absolon has already been tricked into kissing Alison's buttocks when he is expecting to kiss her face. Her boyfriend Nicholas hangs his buttocks out of a window, hoping to trick Absolon into kissing his buttocks in turn and then farts in the face of his rival. In \"The Summoner's Tale\", the friars in the story are to receive the smell of a fart through a twelve-spoked wheel.\nIn the early modern period, the word \"fart\" was not considered especially vulgar; it even surfaced in literary works. For example, Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\", published in 1755, included the word. Johnson defined it with two poems, one by Jonathan Swift, the other by Sir John Suckling.\nBenjamin Franklin prepared an essay on the topic for the Royal Academy of Brussels in 1781 urging scientific study. In 1607, a group of Members of Parliament had written a ribald poem entitled \"The Parliament Fart\", as a symbolic protest against the conservatism of the House of Lords and the king, James I.\nModern usage.\nWhile not one of George Carlin's original seven dirty words, he noted in a later routine that the word \"fart\" ought to be added to \"the list\" of words that were not acceptable (for broadcast) in any context (which have non-offensive meanings), and described television as (then) a \"fart-free zone\". Thomas Wolfe had the phrase \"a fizzing and sulphuric fart\" cut out of his 1929 work \"Look Homeward, Angel\" by his publisher. Ernest Hemingway, who had the same publisher, accepted the principle that \"fart\" could be cut, on the grounds that words should not be used purely to shock. The hippie movement in the 1970s saw a new definition develop, with the use of \"fart\" as a personal noun, to describe a \"detestable person, or someone of small stature or limited mental capacity\", gaining wider and more open usage as a result.\nRhyming slang developed the alternative form \"raspberry tart\", later shortened to \"raspberry\", and occasionally abbreviated further to \"razz\". This was associated with the phrase \"blowing a raspberry\". The word has become more prevalent, and now features in children's literature, such as the \"Walter the Farting Dog\" series of children's books, Robert Munsch's \"Good Families Don't\" and \"The Gas We Pass\" by Shinta Cho."}
{"id": "11237", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11237", "title": "FA Cup", "text": "The Football Association Challenge Cup, more commonly known as the FA Cup, is an annual knockout football competition in men's domestic English football. First played during the 1871\u201372 season, it is the oldest national football competition in the world. It is organised by and named after The Football Association (The FA). Since 2015, it has been known as The Emirates FA Cup after its headline sponsor. A concurrent women's tournament is also held, the Women's FA Cup.\nThe competition is open to any eligible club down to Level 10 of the English football league system \u2013 all 92 professional clubs in the Premier League (level 1) and the English Football League (levels 2 to 4), and several hundred non-League teams in steps 1 to 6 of the National League System (levels 5 to 10). A record 763 clubs competed in 2011\u201312. The tournament consists of 12 randomly drawn rounds followed by the semi-finals and the final. Entrants are not seeded, although a system of byes based on league level ensures higher ranked teams enter in later rounds \u2013 the minimum number of games needed to win, depending on which round a team enters the competition, ranges from six to fourteen.\nThe first six rounds are the Qualifying Competition, from which 32 teams progress to the first round of the Competition Proper, meeting the first of the 48 professional teams from Leagues One and Two. The last entrants are the Premier League and Championship clubs, into the draw for the Third Round Proper. In the modern era, only one non-League team has ever reached the quarter-finals, and teams below Level 2 have never reached the final. As a result, significant focus is given to the smaller teams who progress furthest, especially if they achieve an unlikely \"giant-killing\" victory.\nWinners receive the FA Cup trophy, of which there have been two designs and five actual cups; the latest is a 2014 replica of the second design, introduced in 1911. Winners also qualify for the UEFA Europa League and a place in the upcoming FA Community Shield. Arsenal are the most successful club with 14 titles and Ars\u00e8ne Wenger is the most successful manager in the history of the competition, having won seven finals as Arsenal's manager.\nArsenal are the current holders, having beaten Chelsea 2\u20131 in the 2020 final.\nHistory.\nIn 1863, the newly founded Football Association (the FA) published the Laws of the Game of Association Football, unifying the various different rules in use before then. On 20 July 1871, in the offices of \"The Sportsman\" newspaper, the FA Secretary C. W. Alcock proposed to the FA committee that \"it is desirable that a Challenge Cup should be established in connection with the Association for which all clubs belonging to the Association should be invited to compete\". The inaugural FA Cup tournament kicked off in November 1871. After thirteen games in all, Wanderers were crowned the winners in the final, on 16 March 1872. Wanderers retained the trophy the following year. The modern cup was beginning to be established by the 1888\u201389 season, when qualifying rounds were introduced.\nFollowing the 1914\u201315 edition, the competition was suspended due to the First World War, and did not resume until 1919\u201320. The 1923 FA Cup Final, commonly known as the \"White Horse Final\", was the first final to be played in the newly opened Wembley Stadium (known at the time as the Empire Stadium). The 1927 final saw \"Abide with Me\" being sung for the first time at the Cup final, which has become a pre-match tradition. Due to the outbreak of World War II, the competition was not played between the 1938\u201339 and 1945\u201346 editions. Due to the wartime breaks, the competition did not celebrate its centenary year until 1980\u201381; fittingly the final featured a goal by Ricky Villa which was later voted the greatest goal ever scored in an FA Cup Final, but has since been replaced by Steven Gerrard.\nHaving previously featured replays, the modern day practice of ensuring the semi-final and final matches finish on the day was introduced in 2000. Redevelopment of Wembley saw the final played outside of England for the first time, the 2001\u20132006 finals being played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. The final returned to Wembley in 2007, followed by the semi-finals from 2008.\nEligibility.\nThe competition is open to any club down to Level 10 of the English football league system which meets the eligibility criteria. All clubs in the top four levels (the Premier League and the three divisions of the Football League) are automatically eligible. Clubs in the next six levels (non-league football) are also eligible provided they have played in either the FA Cup, FA Trophy or FA Vase competitions in the previous season. Newly formed clubs, such as F.C. United of Manchester in 2005\u201306 and also 2006\u201307, may not therefore play in the FA Cup in their first season. All clubs entering the competition must also have a suitable stadium.\nIt is very rare for top clubs to miss the competition, although it can happen in exceptional circumstances. Manchester United did not defend their title in 1999\u20132000, as they were already in the inaugural Club World Championship. The club stated that entering both tournaments would overload their fixture schedule and make it more difficult to defend their Champions League and Premier League titles. The club claimed that they did not want to devalue the FA Cup by fielding a weaker side. The move benefited United as they received a two-week break and won the 1999\u20132000 league title by an 18-point margin, although they did not progress past the group stage of the Club World Championship. The withdrawal from the FA Cup, however, drew considerable criticism as this weakened the tournament's prestige and Sir Alex Ferguson later admitted his regret regarding their handling of the situation.\nWelsh sides that play in English leagues are eligible, although since the creation of the League of Wales there are only five clubs remaining: Cardiff City (the only non-English team to win the tournament, in 1927), Swansea City, Newport County, Wrexham, and Merthyr Town. In the early years other teams from Wales, Ireland and Scotland also took part in the competition, with Glasgow side Queen's Park losing the final to Blackburn Rovers in 1884 and 1885 before being barred from entering by the Scottish Football Association. In the 2013\u201314 season the first Channel Island club entered the competition when Guernsey F.C. competed.\nThe number of entrants has increased greatly in recent years. In the 2004\u201305 season, 660 clubs entered the competition, beating the long-standing record of 656 from the 1921\u201322 season. In 2005\u201306 this increased to 674 entrants, in 2006\u201307 to 687, in 2007\u201308 to 731 clubs, and for the 2008\u201309 and 2009\u201310 competitions it reached 762.&lt;ref name=\"record number of entries for 2008/9\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The number has varied slightly but remained roughly stable since then, with 759 clubs participating in 2010\u201311, a record 763 in 2011\u201312, 758 for 2012\u201313, 737 for 2013\u201314 and 736 for 2014\u201315. By comparison, the other major English domestic cup, the League Cup, involves only the 92 members of the Premier League and Football League.\nCompetition format.\nOverview.\nBeginning in August, the competition proceeds as a knockout tournament throughout, consisting of twelve rounds, a semi-final and then a final, in May. A system of byes ensures clubs above Level 9 and 10 enter the competition at later stages. There is no seeding, the fixtures in each round being determined by a random draw. Prior to the fifth round, fixtures ending in a tie are replayed once only. The first six rounds are qualifiers, with the draws organised on a regional basis. The next six rounds are the \"proper\" rounds where all clubs are in one draw.\nSchedule.\nEntrants from the bottom two levels (9 and 10) begin the competition in the Extra Preliminary Round. Clubs from higher levels are then added in later rounds, as per the table below. The months in which rounds are played are traditional, with exact dates subject to each year's calendar.\nThe qualifying rounds are regionalised to reduce the travel costs for smaller non-league sides. The first and second proper rounds were also previously split into Northern and Southern sections, but this practice was ended after the 1997\u201398 competition.\nThe final is normally held the Saturday after the Premier League season finishes in May. The only seasons in recent times when this pattern was not followed were 1999\u20132000, when most rounds were played a few weeks earlier than normal as an experiment, and 2010\u201311 and 2012\u201313 when the FA Cup Final was played before the Premier League season had finished, to allow Wembley Stadium to be ready for the UEFA Champions League final, as well as in 2011\u201312 to allow England time to prepare for that summer's European Championships.\nThe draw.\nThe draws for the Extra-Preliminary, Preliminary, and First Qualifying Rounds used to all occur at the same time. Thereafter, the draw for each subsequent round is not made until after the scheduled dates for the previous round, meaning that in the case of replays, clubs will often know their future opponents in advance.\nThe draw for each of the proper rounds is broadcast live on television, usually taking place at the conclusion of live coverage of one of the games of the previous round. Public interest is particularly high during the draw for the third round, which is where the top-ranked teams are added to the draw.\nTiebreaking.\nIn rounds up to and including the Fourth Round Proper, fixtures resulting in a draw (after normal time) go to a replay, played at the venue of the away team, at a later date; if that replay is still tied, the winner is settled by a period of extra time, and if still necessary, a penalty shootout. Since 2016\u201317, ties have been settled on the day from the quarter-finals onwards, using extra time and penalties. From 2018\u201319, Fifth Round ties are also settled by extra time and penalties.\nUntil 1990\u201391, further replays would be played until one team was victorious. Some ties took as many as six matches to settle; in their 1975 campaign, Fulham played 12 games over six rounds, which remains the most games played by a team to reach a final. Replays were traditionally played three or four days after the original game, but from 1991\u201392 they were staged at least 10 days later on police advice for the rounds proper. This led to penalty shoot-outs being introduced, the first of which came on 26 November 1991 when Rotherham United eliminated Scunthorpe United.\nFrom 1980\u201381 to 1998\u201399, the semi-finals went to extra time on the day if the score after 90 minutes was a draw. If the score was still level after extra time, the match would go to a replay. Replays for the semi-finals were scrapped for 1999\u20132000, the last semi-final to go into a replay was in 1998\u201399 when Manchester United beat Arsenal 2\u20131 after extra time. The first game had ended in a 0\u20130 draw.\nThe first FA Cup Final to go to extra time and a replay was the 1875 final, between the Royal Engineers and the Old Etonians. The initial tie finished 1\u20131 but the Royal Engineers won the replay 2\u20130 in normal time. The last replayed final was the 1993 FA Cup Final, when Arsenal and Sheffield Wednesday fought a 1\u20131 draw. The replay saw Arsenal win the FA Cup, 2\u20131 after extra time.\nThe last quarter-final to go to a replay was Manchester United vs West Ham United in the 2015\u201316 FA Cup. The original game at Old Trafford ended in a 1\u20131 draw, while Manchester United won the replay at the Boleyn Ground, 2\u20131. It was also the last FA Cup game ever played at the Boleyn Ground.\nThe last fifth round replay saw Tottenham Hotspur defeat Rochdale 6\u20131 at Wembley in the 2017\u201318 FA Cup after the first match at Spotland Stadium ended in a 2\u20132 draw.\nQualification for subsequent competitions.\nEuropean football.\nThe FA Cup winners qualify for the following season's UEFA Europa League (formerly named the UEFA Cup; from its launch in 1960 until 1998, they entered the now-defunct UEFA Cup Winners' Cup instead). This European place applies even if the team is relegated or is not in the English top flight. In the past, if the FA Cup winning team also qualified for the following season's Champions League or Europa League through their league or European performance, then the losing FA Cup finalist were given the European berth of the League Cup winners and the League Cup winners would be given the league berth instead (in the Cup Winners' Cup era, teams qualifying for the UEFA Cup via other competitions would be promoted to the Cup Winners' Cup instead). FA Cup winners enter the Europa League at the group stage. Losing finalists, if they had not qualified for Europe via the league, began earlier, at the play-off or third qualifying round stage. From the 2015\u201316 UEFA Europa League season, however, UEFA does not allow the runners-up to qualify for the Europa League through the competition. If the winner \u2014 and until 2015, the runner-up \u2014\nhas already qualified for Europe through their league position (with the exception of the UEFA Cup until 1998), the FA Cup berth is then given to the highest-place team in the league who has not yet qualified.\nFA Community Shield.\nThe FA Cup winners also qualify for the following season's single-match FA Community Shield, the traditional season opener played against the previous season's Premier League champions (or the Premier League runners-up if the FA Cup winners also won the league \u2013 the double).\nVenues.\nFixtures in the 12 rounds of the competition are usually played at the home ground of one of the two teams. The semi-finals and final are played at a neutral venue \u2013 the rebuilt Wembley Stadium (since 2008 and 2007 respectively).\nCompetition rounds.\nIn the matches for the twelve competition rounds, the team who plays at home is decided when the fixtures are drawn \u2013 simply the first team drawn out for each fixture. Occasionally games may have to be moved to other grounds due to other events taking place, security reasons or a ground not being suitable to host popular teams. However, since 2003, clubs cannot move grounds to the away side's for capacity or financial reasons. If any move has to be made, it has to be to a neutral venue and any additional monies earned by the move goes into the central pot. In the event of a draw, the replay is played at the ground of the team who originally played away from home.\nIn the days when multiple replays were possible, the second replay (and any further replays) were played at neutral grounds. The clubs involved could alternatively agree to toss for home advantage in the second replay.\nSemi-finals.\nThe semi-finals have been played exclusively at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium since 2008, one year after it opened and after it had already hosted a final (in 2007). For the first decade of the competition, the Kennington Oval was used as the semi-final venue. In the period between this first decade and the reopening of Wembley, semi-finals were played at high-capacity neutral venues around England; usually the home grounds of teams not involved in that semi-final, chosen to be roughly equidistant between the two teams for fairness of travel. The top three most used venues in this period were Villa Park in Birmingham (55 times), Hillsborough in Sheffield (34 times) and Old Trafford in Manchester (23 times). The original Wembley Stadium was also used seven times for semi-final, between 1991 and 2000 (the last held there), but not always for fixtures featuring London teams. In 2005, both were held at the Millennium Stadium.\nIn 2003 the FA took the decision to permanently use the new Wembley for semi-finals to recoup debts in financing the new stadium. This was controversial, with the move seen as both unfair to fans of teams located far from London, as well as taking some of the prestige away from a Wembley final. In defending the move, the FA has also cited the extra capacity Wembley offers, although the 2013 fixture between Millwall and Wigan led to the unprecedented step of placing 6,000 tickets on sale to neutral fans after the game failed to sell out. A fan poll by \"The Guardian\" in 2013 found 86% opposition to Wembley semi-finals.\nFinal.\nThe final has been played at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium since it opened, in 2007. The rebuilding process meant that between 2001 and 2006 they were hosted at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff in Wales. Prior to rebuilding, the final was hosted by the original Wembley Stadium since it opened in 1923 (being originally named the Empire Stadium). One exception to this 78 year series of Empire Stadium finals (including five replays) was the 1970 replay between Leeds and Chelsea, held at Old Trafford in Manchester.\nIn the 51 years prior to the Empire Stadium opening, the final (including 8 replays) was held in a variety of locations, predominantly in London, and mainly at the Kennington Oval and then Crystal Palace. It was played 22 times at The Oval (the inaugural competition in 1872, and then all but two times until 1892). After The Oval, Crystal Palace hosted 21 finals from 1895 to 1914, broken up by four replays elsewhere. The other London venues were Stamford Bridge from 1920 to 1922 (the last three finals before the move to Empire Stadium); and the University of Oxford's Lillie Bridge in Fulham for the second ever final, in 1873. The other venues used sparingly in this period were all outside of London, as follows:\nArtificial turf.\nThe FA permitted artificial turf (3G) pitches in all rounds of the competition from the 2014\u201315 edition and beyond. Under the 2015\u201316 rules, the pitch must be of FIFA One Star quality, or Two Star for ties if they involve one of the 92 professional clubs. This followed approval two years previously for their use in the qualifying rounds only \u2013 if a team with a 3G pitch progressed to the competition proper, they had to switch their tie to the ground of another eligible entrant with a natural grass pitch. Having been strong proponents of the surface, the first match in the proper rounds to be played on a 3G surface was a televised first round replay at Maidstone United's Gallagher Stadium on 20 November 2014.\nTrophy.\nThe eventual winners of the competition receive the FA Cup; it is only loaned to the club by the FA, under the current (2015\u201316) rules it must be returned by 1 March, or earlier if given seven days' notice. Traditionally, the holders had the Cup until the following year's presentation, although more recently the trophy has been taken on publicity tours by the FA in between finals.\nThe trophy comes in three parts \u2013 the cup itself, plus a lid and a base. There have been two designs of trophy in use, but five physical trophies have been presented. The original trophy, known as the \"little tin idol\", was 18 inches high and made by Martin, Hall &amp; Co. It was stolen in 1895 and never recovered, and so was replaced by an exact replica, used until 1910. The FA decided to change the design after the 1909 winners, Manchester United, made their own replica, leading the FA to realise they did not own the copyright. This new, larger design was by Fattorini and Sons, and was used from 1911. In order to preserve this original, from 1992 it was replaced by an exact replica, although this had to be replaced after just over two decades, after showing wear and tear from being handled more than in previous eras. This third replica, first used in 2014, was built heavier to withstand the increased handling. Of the four surviving trophies, only the 1895 replica has entered private ownership.\nThe name of the winning team is engraved on the silver band around the base as soon as the final has finished, in order to be ready in time for the presentation ceremony. This means the engraver has just five minutes to perform a task which would take 20 under normal conditions, although time is saved by engraving the year on during the match, and sketching the presumed winner. During the final, the trophy is decorated with ribbons in the colours of both finalists, with the loser's ribbons being removed at the end of the game. The tradition of tying ribbons started after Tottenham Hotspur won the 1901 FA Cup Final and the wife of a Spurs director decided to tie blue and white ribbons to the handles of the cup. Traditionally, at Wembley finals, the presentation is made at the Royal Box, with players, led by the captain, mounting a staircase to a gangway in front of the box and returning by a second staircase on the other side of the box. At Cardiff the presentation was made on a podium on the pitch.\nThe tradition of presenting the trophy immediately after the game did not start until the 1882 final; after the first final in 1872 the trophy was not presented to the winners, Wanderers, until a reception held four weeks later in the Pall Mall Restaurant in London. Under the original rules, the trophy was to be permanently presented to any club which won the competition three times, although when inaugural winners Wanderers achieved this feat by the 1876 final, the rules were changed by FA Secretary CW Alcock (who was also captain of Wanderers in their first victory).\nPortsmouth have the distinction of being the football club which has held the FA Cup trophy for the longest uninterrupted period - seven years. Portsmouth had defeated Wolverhampton Wanderers 4\u20131 in the 1939 FA Cup Final and were awarded the trophy as 1938\u201339 FA Cup winners. But with the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the regular Football League and FA Cup competitions for the 1939\u201340 season were cancelled for the duration of the war. Portsmouth's manager Jack Tinn was rumoured to have kept the FA Cup trophy 'safe under his bed' throughout the duration of the war, but this is an urban myth. Because the naval city of Portsmouth was a primary strategic military target for German Luftwaffe bombing, the FA Cup trophy was actually taken ten miles to the north of Portsmouth, to the nearby Hampshire village of Lovedean, and there it resided in a quaint thatched roof country pub called \"The Bird in Hand\" for the seven years of the war. After the conclusion of World War II, the FA Cup trophy was presented back to the Football Association by the club in time for the 1946 FA Cup Final.\nOriginal design from 1871.\n1871 original.\nThe first trophy, the 'little tin idol', was made by Martin, Hall &amp; Co at a cost of \u00a320. It was stolen from a Birmingham shoe shop window belonging to William Shillcock while held by Aston Villa on 11 September 1895 and was never seen again. Despite a \u00a310 reward for information, the crime was never solved. As it happened while it was in their care, the FA fined Villa \u00a325 to pay for a replacement.\nJust over 60 years later, 80 year old career criminal Henry (Harry) James Burge claimed to have committed the theft, confessing to a newspaper, with the story being published in the \"Sunday Pictorial\" newspaper on 23 February 1958. He claimed to have carried out the robbery with two other men, although when discrepancies with a contemporaneous report in the \"Birmingham Post\" newspaper (the crime pre-dated written police reports) in his account of the means of entry and other items stolen, detectives decided there was no realistic possibility of a conviction and the case was closed. Burge claimed the cup had been melted down to make counterfeit half-crown coins, which matched known intelligence of the time, in which stolen silver was being used to forge coins which were then laundered through betting shops at a local racecourse, although Burge had no past history of forgery in a record of 42 previous convictions for which he had spent 42 years in prison. He had been further imprisoned in 1957 for seven years for theft from cars. Released in 1961, he died in 1964.\n1895 replica.\nAfter being rendered obsolete by the redesign, the 1895 replica was presented in 1911 to the FA's long-serving president Lord Kinnaird. Kinnaird died in 1923, and his family kept it in their possession, out of view, until putting it up for auction in 2005. It was sold at Christie's auction house on 19 May 2005 for \u00a3420,000 (\u00a3478,400 including auction fees and taxes). The sale price set a new world record for a piece of football memorabilia, surpassing the \u00a3254,000 paid for the Jules Rimet World Cup Trophy in 1997. The successful bidder was David Gold, the then joint chairman of Birmingham City; claiming the FA and government were doing nothing proactive to ensure the trophy remained in the country, Gold stated his purchase was motivated by wanting to save it for the nation. Accordingly, Gold presented the trophy to the National Football Museum in Preston on 20 April 2006, where it went on immediate public display. It later moved with the museum to its new location in Manchester. In November 2012, it was ceremonially presented to Royal Engineers, after they beat Wanderers 7\u20131 in a charity replay of the first FA Cup final. In September 2020, Gold sold the replica trophy for \u00a3760,000 through auction house, Bonhams. In January 2021, it was revealed that the trophy had been purchased by Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the owner of Manchester City, who stated that it would be returned on loan to the National Football Museum.\nCurrent design from 1911.\n1911 original.\nThe redesigned trophy first used in 1911 was larger at 61.5\u00a0cm (24.2 inches) high, and was designed and manufactured by Fattorini's of Bradford, coincidentally being won by Bradford City in its first outing.\nOn the 27 March 2016 episode of the BBC television programme Antiques Roadshow, this trophy was valued at \u00a31\u00a0million by expert Alastair Dickenson, although he suggested that, due to the design featuring depictions of grapes and vines, it may not have been specifically produced for the FA, but was instead an off-the-shelf design originally meant to be a wine or champagne cooler. This was later disproved when Thomas Fattorini was invited to the Antiques Roadshow to \"ambush\" Alastair Dickenson with the competition winning design by Fattorini &amp; Sons. The show was filmed at Baddesley Clinton and subsequentially aired on the 23rd October 2016.\nA smaller, but otherwise identical, replica was also made by Thomas Fattorini, the North Wales Coast FA Cup trophy, and is contested annually by members of that regional Association.\n1992 replica.\nThe 1992 replica was made by Toye, Kenning and Spencer. A copy of this trophy was also produced, in case anything happened to the primary trophy.\n2014 replica.\nThe 2014 replica was made by Thomas Lyte, handcrafted in sterling 925 silver over 250 hours. A weight increase for greater durability has taken it to .\nMedals.\nEach club in the final receives 40 winners' or runners'-up medals to be distributed among players, staff and officials.\nSponsorship.\nSince the start of the 1994\u201395 season, the FA Cup has been sponsored. However, to protect the identity of the competition, the sponsored name has always included 'The FA Cup' in addition to the sponsor's name, unlike sponsorship deals for the League Cup where the word 'cup' is preceded by only the sponsor's name. Sponsorship deals run for four years, though \u2013 as in the case of E.ON \u2013 one-year extensions may be agreed. Emirates Airline is the sponsor from 2015 to 2018, renaming the competition as 'The Emirates FA Cup', unlike previous editions, which included 'The FA Cup in association with E.ON' and 'The FA Cup with Budweiser'. This was later extended until 2021.\nFrom 2006 to 2013, Umbro supplied match balls for all FA Cup matches. They were replaced at the start of the 2013\u201314 season by Nike, who produced the competition's official match ball for five seasons. Mitre took over for the 2018\u201319 season, beginning a three-year partnership with the FA.\nCup runs and giant killings.\nThe possibility of unlikely victories in the earlier rounds of the competition, where lower ranked teams beat higher placed opposition in what is known as a \"giant killing\" or \"cupset\", is much anticipated by the public. Such upsets are considered an integral part of the tradition and prestige of the competition, and the attention gained by giant-killing teams can be as great as that for winners of the cup. Almost every club in the League Pyramid has a fondly remembered giant-killing act in its history. It is considered particularly newsworthy when a top Premier League team suffers an upset defeat, or where the giant-killer is a non-league club, i.e. from outside The Football League.\nOne analysis of four years of FA Cup results showed that it was 99.85 per cent likely that at least one team would beat one from its next higher division in a given year. The probability drops to 48.8 per cent for a two-division gap, and 39.28 per cent for a three-division gap.\nEarly years.\nThe Football League was founded in 1888, 16 years after the first FA Cup competition. Since the creation of the Football League, Tottenham Hotspur is the only non-League side to win the Cup, taking the 1901 FA Cup with a victory over reigning League runners-up Sheffield United. At that time, the Football League consisted of two divisions with a combined total of 36 clubs, mostly teams from Northern England and the Midlands, following a gradual increase on the original total of 12 Football League clubs on its formation in 1888.\nSpurs competed in the Southern Football League, which ran parallel to the Football League, and were champions. Only two other non-League clubs have even reached the final since the founding of the League: Sheffield Wednesday in 1890 (champions of the Football Alliance, a rival league which was already effectively the tier below the League, which it formally became in 1892 upon formation of the Second Division \u2014 Wednesday being let straight into the First Division) and the Southern League's Southampton in 1900 and 1902. Upon the Football League's expansion and creation of the Third Division for 1920\u201321, all the clubs in the Southern League First Division clubs transferred over and it has been since placed below the League in the English football league system, with the National League sandwiching the two since 1979\u201380.\nNon-League giant killings.\nThe most recent examples of a non-league team (Levels 5 to 10) beating a Level 1 opponent are National League side Lincoln City's away victory over Premier League side Burnley in the 2016\u201317 FA Cup and Conference Premier side Luton Town's away victory over Level 1 Premier League's Norwich City in the 2012\u201313 Fourth Round Proper. This was the first defeat of a top flight team by non-league opposition since 1989, when Sutton United claimed a 2\u20131 victory at home over Coventry City, who had won the FA Cup two seasons earlier and finished that season seventh in the a First Division.\nIn the 1971\u201372 FA Cup, a non-league side achieved a Level 1 giant killing that was voted \"best FA Cup tie ever\" in a 2007 poll by \"The Observer\" newspaper. Non-league Hereford United were trailing First Division Newcastle United 0\u20131 with less than seven minutes left in the Third Round Proper replay, when Hereford's Ronnie Radford scored the equalizer \u2013 a goal still shown regularly when FA Cup fixtures are broadcast. Hereford finished the shocking comeback by defeating Newcastle 2\u20131 in the match. They finished that season as runners-up of the Southern League, behind Chelmsford City, and were voted into the Football League at the expense of Barrow.\nSome small clubs gain a reputation for being \"cup specialists\" after two or more giant killing feats within a few years. Yeovil Town hold the record for the most victories over league opposition as a non-league team, having recorded 20 wins through the years before they achieved promotion into The Football League in 2003. The record for a club which has never entered the Football League is held by Altrincham, with 17 wins against league teams.\nNon-League cup runs.\nFor non-League teams, reaching the Third Round Proper \u2013 where all Level 1 sides now enter \u2013 is considered a major achievement. In the 2008\u201309 FA Cup, a record eight non-League teams achieved this feat. As of the 2016\u201317 season, only nine non-League teams have reached the Fifth Round Proper (final 16) since 1945, and only Lincoln City have progressed to the Sixth Round (final 8), during the 2016\u201317 edition of the tournament.\nChasetown, while playing at Level 8 of English football during the 2007\u201308 competition, were the lowest-ranked team to ever play in the Third Round Proper (final 64, of 731 teams entered that season). Chasetown was then a member of the Southern League Division One Midlands (a lower level within the Southern Football League), when they lost to Football League Championship (Level 2) team Cardiff City, the eventual FA Cup runners-up that year. Their success earned the lowly organisation over \u00a360,000 in prize money. Marine F.C. matched this in the 2020\u201321 competition as a member of the Northern Premier League Division One North West, and were drawn against Premier League (Level 1) team Tottenham Hotspur, whom they lost to 5\u20130.\nGiant killings between League clubs.\nIn games between League sides, one of the most notable results was the 1992 victory by Wrexham, bottom of the previous season's League (avoiding relegation due to expansion of The Football League), over reigning champions Arsenal. Another similar shock was when Shrewsbury Town beat Everton 2\u20131 in 2003. Everton finished seventh in the Premier League and Shrewsbury Town were relegated to the Football Conference that same season.\nWinners and finalists.\nResults by team.\nSince its establishment, the FA Cup has been won by 43 different teams. Teams shown in \"italics\" are no longer in existence. Additionally, Queen's Park ceased to be eligible to enter the FA Cup after a Scottish Football Association ruling in 1887.\nConsecutive winners.\nFour clubs have won consecutive FA Cups on more than one occasion: Wanderers (1872, 1873 and 1876, 1877, 1878), Blackburn Rovers (1884, 1885, 1886 and 1890, 1891), Tottenham Hotspur (1961, 1962 and 1981, 1982) and Arsenal (2002, 2003 and 2014, 2015).\nWinning managers.\nThe record for most titles for a manager is held by Ars\u00e8ne Wenger, who won the FA Cup with Arsenal seven times (1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2017). Wenger is also the only manager to have won the Cup at the old Wembley Stadium, the Millennium Stadium and the new Wembley Stadium.\nDoubles/Trebles.\nManchester City (2019) are the only club to have achieved a domestic treble of league, FA Cup and EFL Cup, having beaten Chelsea 4\u20133 on penalties in the EFL Cup Final, finished at the top of the English Premier League, and beaten Watford 6\u20130 in the FA Cup Final. Seven clubs have won the FA Cup as part of a League and Cup double, namely Preston North End (1889), Aston Villa (1897), Tottenham Hotspur (1961), Arsenal (1971, 1998, 2002), Liverpool (1986), Manchester United (1994, 1996, 1999) and Chelsea (2010). In 1993, Arsenal became the first side to win both the FA Cup and the League Cup in the same season when they beat Sheffield Wednesday 2\u20131 in both finals. Liverpool (in 2001), Chelsea (in 2007) and Manchester City (in 2019) have since repeated this feat. In 2012, Chelsea accomplished a different cup double consisting of the FA Cup and the 2012 Champions League. In 1998\u201399, Manchester United added the 1999 Champions League title to their league and cup double to complete a unique Treble. Two years later, in 2000\u201301, Liverpool won the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup to complete a cup treble.\nOutside England.\nThe FA Cup has only been won by a non-English team once. Cardiff City achieved this in 1927 when they beat Arsenal in the final at Wembley. They had previously made it to the final only to lose to Sheffield United in 1925 and lost another final to Portsmouth in 2008. Cardiff City is also the only team to win the national cups of two different countries in the same season, having also won the Welsh Cup in 1927. The Scottish team Queen's Park reached and lost the final in both 1884 and 1885.\nOutside the top division.\nSince the creation of the Football League in 1888, the final has never been contested by two teams from outside the top division, and there have only been eight winners who were not in the top flight: Notts County (1894); Tottenham Hotspur (1901); Wolverhampton Wanderers (1908); Barnsley (1912); West Bromwich Albion (1931); Sunderland (1973), Southampton (1976) and West Ham United (1980). With the exception of Tottenham, these clubs were all playing in the second tier (the old Second Division) \u2013 Tottenham were playing in the Southern League and were only elected to the Football League in 1908, meaning they are the only non-League winners of the FA Cup since the League's creation. Other than Tottenham's victory, only 24 finalists have come from outside English football's top tier, with a record of 7 wins and 17 runners-up: and none at all from the third tier or lower, Southampton (1902, then in the Southern League) being the last finalist from outside the top two tiers.\nSunderland's win in 1973 was considered a major upset, having beaten Leeds United who finished third in the top flight that season, as was West Ham's victory over Arsenal in 1980 as the Gunners were in their third successive FA Cup Final and were also the cup holders from the previous year as well as just having finished 4th in the First Division, whereas West Ham had ended the season 7th in Division 2. This also marked the last time (as of 2018-19) a team from outside the top division won the FA Cup. Uniquely, in 2008 three of the four semi-finalists (Barnsley, Cardiff City and West Bromwich) were from outside the top division, although the eventual winner was the last remaining top-flight team, Portsmouth. West Bromwich (1931) are the only team to have won the FA Cup and earned promotion to the top flight in the same season; whereas Wigan Athletic (2013) are the only team to have won the Cup and been relegated from the top flight in the same season.\nMedia coverage.\nDomestic broadcasters.\nThe FA Cup Final is one of 10 events reserved for live broadcast on UK terrestrial television under the Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events.\nIn the early years of coverage the BBC had exclusive radio coverage with a picture of the pitch marked in the Radio Times with numbered squares to help the listener follow the match on the radio. The first FA Cup Final on Radio was in 1926 between Bolton Wanderers and Manchester City but this was only broadcast in Manchester, the first national final on BBC Radio was between Arsenal and Cardiff in 1927. The first final on BBC Television was in 1937 in a match which featured Sunderland and Preston North End but this was not televised in full. The following season's final between Preston and Huddersfield was covered in full by the BBC. When ITV was formed in 1955 they shared final coverage with the BBC in one of the only club matches shown live on television, during the 1970s and 1980s coverage became more elaborate with BBC and ITV trying to steal viewers from the others by starting coverage earlier and earlier some starting as early as 9\u00a0a.m. which was six hours before kick off. The sharing of rights between BBC and ITV continued from 1955 to 1988, when ITV lost coverage to the new Sports Channel which later became Sky Sports.\nFrom 1988 to 1997, the BBC and Sky Sports had coverage of the FA Cup, the BBC had highlights on Match of the Day and usually one match per round while Sky had the same deal. From 1997 to 2001, ITV and Sky shared live coverage with both having two matches per round and BBC continuing with highlights on Match of the Day. From 2002 to 2008, BBC and Sky again shared coverage with BBC having two or three matches per round and Sky having one or two. From 2008\u201309 to 2013\u201314, FA Cup matches are shown live by ITV across England and Wales, with UTV broadcasting to Northern Ireland but STV refusing to show them. ITV shows 16 FA Cup games per season, including the first pick of live matches from each of the first to sixth rounds of the competition, plus one semi-final exclusively live. The final is also shown live on ITV. Under the same 2008 contract, Setanta Sports showed three games and one replay in each round from round three to five, two quarter-finals, one semi-final and the final. The channel also broadcast ITV's matches exclusively to Scotland, after the ITV franchise holder in Scotland, STV, decided not to broadcast FA Cup games. Setanta entered administration in June 2009 and as a result the FA terminated Setanta's deal to broadcast FA-sanctioned competitions and England internationals. As a result of Setanta going out of business ITV showed the competition exclusively in the 2009\u201310 season with between three and four matches per round, all quarter finals, semi-finals and final live as the FA could not find a pay TV broadcaster in time. ESPN bought the competition for the 2010\u201311 to 2012\u201313 season and during this time Rebecca Lowe became the first woman to host the FA Cup Final in the UK.\nIn October 2009, The FA announced that ITV would show an additional match in the First and Second Rounds on ITV, with one replay match shown on ITV4. One match and one replay match from the first two rounds will broadcast on The FA website for free, in a similar situation to the 2010 World Cup Qualifier between Ukraine and England. The 2009\u201310 First Round match between Oldham Athletic and Leeds United was the first FA Cup match to be streamed online live.\nMany expected BSkyB to make a bid to show some of the remaining FA Cup games for the remainder of the 2009\u201310 season which would include a semi-final and shared rights to the final. ESPN took over the package Setanta held for the FA Cup from the 2010\u201311 season. The 2011 final was also shown live on Sky 3D in addition to ESPN (who provided the 3D coverage for Sky 3D) and ITV. Following the sale of ESPN's UK and Ireland channels to BT, ESPN's rights package transferred to BT Sport from the 2013\u201314 season.\nBBC Radio 5 Live and Talksport provides radio coverage including several full live commentaries per round, with additional commentaries broadcast on BBC Local Radio.\nUntil the 2008\u201309 season, the BBC and Sky Sports shared television coverage, with the BBC showing three matches in the earlier rounds. Some analysts argued the decision to move away from the Sky and, in particular, the BBC undermined the FA Cup in the eyes of the public.\nThe early rounds of the 2008\u201309 competition were covered for the first time by ITV's online service, ITV Local. The first match of the competition, between Wantage Town and Brading Town, was broadcast live online. Highlights of eight games of each round were broadcast as catch up on ITV Local. Since ITV Local closed, this coverage did not continue.\nITV lost the rights to the FA Cup beginning with the 2014\u201315 FA Cup, terrestrial rights returned to BBC Sport, with the final being shown on BBC One while BT Sport hold the pay TV rights. Under this deal, the BBC will show around the same number of games as ITV and still having the first pick for each round.\nMatches involving Welsh clubs are sometimes exclusively broadcast on Welsh language channel S4C, which is also available to view across the rest of the United Kingdom on satellite and cable television, and through the channel's website. A similar arrangement is shared with BBC Cymru Wales from 2014 to 2015, potentially giving the BBC an extra match per round.\nOn the 23rd May 2019, it was announced that ITV would replace BT Sport in broadcasting the FA Cup from the 2021\u201322 season, this new deal will see BBC and ITV become joint broadcasters of the tournament, this will mean for the first time that all FA Cup matches would be all be exclusively broadcast on free-to-air television.\nOverseas broadcasters.\nThe FA sells overseas rights separately from the domestic contract. "}
{"id": "11238", "revid": "25353172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11238", "title": "Fenway Park", "text": "Fenway Park is a baseball park located in Boston, Massachusetts, near Kenmore Square. Since 1912, it has been the home for the Boston Red Sox, the city's American League baseball team, and since 1953, its only Major League Baseball (MLB) franchise. While the stadium was built in 1912, it was rebuilt in 1934. It is the oldest active ballpark in MLB. Because of its age and constrained location in Boston's dense Fenway\u2013Kenmore neighborhood, the park has been renovated or expanded many times, resulting in quirky features including \"The Triangle\", Pesky's Pole, and the Green Monster in left field. It is the fifth-smallest among MLB ballparks by seating capacity, second-smallest by total capacity, and one of eight that cannot accommodate at least 40,000 spectators.\nFenway has hosted the World Series 11 times, with the Red Sox winning six of them and the Boston Braves winning one. Besides baseball games, it has also been the site of many other sporting and cultural events including professional football games for the Boston Redskins, Boston Yanks, and the New England Patriots; concerts; soccer and hockey games (such as the 2010 NHL Winter Classic); and political and religious campaigns.\nApril 20, 2012, marked Fenway Park's centennial. On March 7 of that year, the park was added to the National Register of Historic Places. Former pitcher Bill Lee has called Fenway Park \"a shrine\". It is a pending Boston Landmark, which will regulate any further changes to the park. The ballpark is considered to be one of the most well-known sports venues in the world and a symbol of Boston.\nHistory.\nIn 1911, while the Red Sox were still playing on the old Huntington Avenue Grounds, owner John I. Taylor purchased the land bordered by Brookline Avenue, Jersey Street, Van Ness Street and Lansdowne Street and developed it into a larger baseball stadium, Fenway Park.\nTaylor claimed the name Fenway Park came from its location in the Fenway neighborhood of Boston, which was partially created late in the nineteenth century by filling in marshland or \"fens\", to create the Back Bay Fens urban park. However, given that Taylor's family also owned the Fenway Realty Company, the promotional value of the naming at the time has been cited as well. Like many classic ballparks, Fenway Park was constructed on an asymmetrical block, with consequent asymmetry in its field dimensions. The park was designed by architect James E. McLaughlin, and the General Contractor was the Charles Logue Building Company.\nThe first game was played April 20, 1912, with mayor John F. Fitzgerald throwing out the first pitch and Boston defeating the New York Highlanders, 7\u20136 in 11 innings. Newspaper coverage of the opening was overshadowed by continuing coverage of the \"Titanic\" sinking a few days earlier.\nIn June 1919 a rally supporting Irish Independence turned out nearly 50,000 supporters to see the President of the Irish Republic, \u00c9amon de Valera, and it was allegedly the largest crowd ever in the ballpark.\nFenway Park had historically drawn low attendance, its lowest occurring late in the 1965 season with two games having paid attendance under 500 spectators. Its attendance has risen since the Red Sox' 1967 \"Impossible Dream\" season, and on September 8, 2008, with a game versus the Tampa Bay Rays, Fenway Park broke the all-time Major League record for consecutive sellouts with 456, surpassing the record previously held by Jacobs Field in Cleveland. On Wednesday, June 17, 2009, the park celebrated its 500th consecutive Red Sox sellout. According to WBZ-TV, the team joined three NBA teams which achieved 500 consecutive home sellouts. The sellout streak ended on April 11, 2013; in all the Red Sox sold out 794 regular season games and an additional 26 postseason games during this streak.\nThe park's address was originally 24 Jersey Street. In 1977, the section of Jersey Street nearest the park was renamed Yawkey Way in honor of longtime Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey, and the park's address was 4 Yawkey Way until 2018, when the street's name was reverted to Jersey Street. The address is now 4 Jersey Street.\nChanges to Fenway Park.\nSome of the changes include:\nNew Fenway Park.\nOn May 15, 1999, then Red Sox CEO John Harrington announced plans for a new Fenway Park to be built near the existing structure. It was to have seated 44,130 and would have been a modernized replica of the current Fenway Park, with the same field dimensions except for a shorter right field and reduced foul territory. Some sections of the existing ballpark were to be preserved (mainly the original Green Monster and the third base side of the park) as part of the overall new layout. Most of the current stadium was to be demolished to make room for new development, with one section remaining to house a baseball museum and public park. The proposal was highly controversial; it projected that the park had less than 15 years of usable life, would require hundreds of millions of dollars of public investment, and was later revealed to be part of a scheme by current ownership to increase the marketable value of the team as they were ready to sell. Several groups (such as \"Save Fenway Park\") formed in an attempt to block the move. Discussion took place for several years regarding the new stadium proposal. One plan involved building a \"Sports Megaplex\" in South Boston, where a new Fenway would be located next to a new stadium for the New England Patriots. The Patriots ultimately built Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, their home throughout most of their history, which ended the Megaplex proposal. The Red Sox and the city of Boston failed to reach an agreement on building the new stadium, and in 2005, the Red Sox ownership group announced that the team would stay at Fenway Park indefinitely. The stadium has since been renovated, and will remain usable until as late as 2062.\nFeatures.\nThe park is located along Lansdowne Street and Jersey Street in the Kenmore Square area of Boston. The area includes many buildings of similar height and architecture and thus it blends in with its surroundings. When pitcher Roger Clemens arrived in Boston for the first time in 1984, he took a taxi from Logan Airport and was sure the driver had misunderstood his directions when he announced their arrival at the park. Clemens recalled telling the driver \"No, Fenway Park, it's a baseball stadium\u00a0... this is a warehouse.\" Only when the driver told Clemens to look up and he saw the light towers did he realize he was in the right place.\nFenway Park is one of the two remaining jewel box ballparks still in use in Major League Baseball (the other being Wrigley Field), and both have a significant number of obstructed view seats, due to pillars supporting the upper deck. These are sold as such, and are a reminder of the architectural limitations of older ballparks.\nGeorge Will asserts in his book \"\" that Fenway Park is a \"hitters' ballpark\", with its short right-field fence (302\u00a0feet), narrow foul ground (the smallest of any current major league park), and generally closer-than-normal outfield fences. By Rule 1.04, Note(a), all parks built after 1958 have been required to have foul lines at least long and a center-field fence at least from home plate. (This rule had the unintended consequence of leading to the \"Cookie-Cutter Stadium\" era, which ended when Camden Yards opened in 1993.) Regarding the narrow foul territory, Will writes:\nWill states that some observers might feel that these unique aspects of Fenway give the Red Sox an advantage over their opponents, given that the Red Sox hitters play 81 games at the home stadium while each opponent plays no more than nine games as visiting teams but Will does not share this view.\nFenway Park's bullpen wall is much lower than most other outfield walls; outfielders are known to end up flying over this wall when chasing balls hit that direction, such as with Torii Hunter when chasing a David Ortiz game-tying grand slam that direction in Game 2 of the 2013 ALCS.\nThe Green Monster.\nThe Green Monster is the nickname of the left field wall in the park. It is located from home plate; this short distance often benefits right-handed hitters.\nPart of the original ballpark construction of 1912, the wall is made of wood, but was covered in tin and concrete in 1934 when the scoreboard was added. The wall was covered in hard plastic in 1976. The scoreboard is manually updated throughout the game. The inside walls of the Green Monster are covered with players signatures from over the years. Despite the name, the Green Monster was not painted green until 1947; before that it was covered with advertisements. The \"Monster\" designation is relatively new; for most of its history it was simply called \"the wall.\" In 2003, terrace-style seating was added on top of the wall.\n\"The Triangle\".\n\"The Triangle\" is a region of center field where the walls form a triangle whose far corner is from home plate. That deep right-center point is conventionally given as the center field distance. The true center is unmarked, from home plate, to the left of \"The Triangle\" when viewed from home plate.\nThere was once a smaller \"triangle\" at the left end of the bleachers in center field, posted as . The end of the bleachers form a right angle with the Green Monster and the flagpole stands within that little triangle. That is not the true power alley, but deep left-center. The true power alley distance is not posted. The foul line intersects with the Green Monster at nearly a right angle, so the power alley could be estimated at , assuming the power alley is 22.5\u00b0 away from the foul line as measured from home plate.\n\"Williamsburg\".\n\"Williamsburg\" was the name, invented by sportswriters, for the bullpen area built in front of the right-center field bleachers in 1940. It was built there primarily for the benefit of Ted Williams, to enable him and other left-handed batters to hit more home runs, since it was closer than the bleacher wall.\nThe Lone Red Seat.\nThe lone red seat in the right field bleachers (Section 42, Row 37, Seat 21) signifies the longest home run ever hit at Fenway. The home run, hit by Ted Williams on June 9, 1946, was officially measured at \u2013 well beyond \"Williamsburg\". According to Hit Tracker Online, the ball, if unobstructed, would have flown .\nThe ball landed on Joseph A. Boucher, penetrating his large straw hat and hitting him in the head. A confounded Boucher was later quoted as saying, \nThere have been other home runs hit at Fenway that have contended for the distance title. In the 2007 book \"The Year Babe Ruth Hit 104 Home Runs\", researcher Bill Jenkinson found evidence that on May 25, 1926, Babe Ruth hit one in the pre-1934 bleacher configuration which landed five rows from the top in right field. This would have placed it at an estimated from home plate. On June 23, 2001, Manny Ramirez hit one that struck a light tower above the Green Monster, which would have cleared the park had it missed. The park's official estimate placed the home run one foot short of Williams' record at . An April 2019 home run by Rowdy Tellez of the Toronto Blue Jays was initially reported as , but later found to be significantly shorter, approximately .\nFoul poles.\nPesky's Pole is the name for the pole on the right field foul line, which stands from home plate, the shortest outfield distance (left or right field) in Major League Baseball. Like the measurement of the left-field line at Fenway Park, this has been disputed. Aerial shots show it to be noticeably shorter than the (actual) 302 foot line in right field, and Pesky has been quoted as estimating it to be \"around 295 feet\".\nDespite the short wall, home runs in this area are relatively rare, as the fence curves away from the foul pole sharply. The pole was named after Johnny Pesky, a light-hitting shortstop and long-time coach for the Red Sox, who hit some of his six home runs at Fenway Park around the pole but never off the pole. Pesky (playing 1942 to 1952, except for 1943 to 1945) was a contact hitter who hit just 17 home runs in his career (6 at Fenway Park). It's not known how many of these six actually landed near the pole. The Red Sox give credit to pitcher and Sox broadcaster Mel Parnell for coining the name. The most notable for Pesky is a two-run homer in the eighth inning of the 1946 Opening Day game to win the game. According to Pesky, Mel Parnell named the pole after Pesky won a game for Parnell in with a home run down the short right field line, just around the pole. However, Pesky hit just one home run in a game pitched by Parnell, a two-run shot in the first inning of a game against Detroit played on June 11, 1950. The game was eventually won by the visiting Tigers in the 14th inning on a three-run shot by Tigers right fielder Vic Wertz and Parnell earned a no-decision that day.\nThe term, though it had been in use since the 1950s, became far more common when Parnell became a Red Sox broadcaster in 1965. Mark Bellhorn hit what proved to be the game-winning home run off of Juli\u00e1n Tav\u00e1rez, in Game 1 of the 2004 World Series off that pole's screen.\nOn September 27, 2006, on Pesky's 87th birthday, the Red Sox organization officially dedicated the right field foul pole as Pesky's Pole with a commemorative plaque placed at its base.\nThe seat directly on the foul side of Pesky's Pole in the front row is Section 94, Row E, Seat 5 and is usually sold as a lone ticket.\nIn a ceremony before the Red Sox's 2005 game against the Cincinnati Reds, the pole on the left field foul line atop the Green Monster was named the Fisk Foul Pole, or \"Pudge's Pole\", in honor of Carlton Fisk. Fisk provided one of baseball's most enduring moments in Game 6 of the 1975 World Series against the Reds. Facing Reds right-hander Pat Darcy in the 12th inning with the score tied at 6, Fisk hit a long fly ball down the left field line. It appeared to be heading foul, but Fisk, after initially appearing unsure of whether or not to continue running to first base, famously jumped and waved his arms to the right as if to somehow direct the ball fair. It ricocheted off the foul pole, winning the game for the Red Sox and sending the series to a seventh and deciding game the next night, which Cincinnati won. Like Johnny Pesky's No. 6, Carlton had his No. 27 player number retired by the team.\n\"Duffy's Cliff\".\nFrom 1912 to 1933, there was a high incline in front of the then -high left field wall at Fenway Park, extending from the left-field foul pole to the center field flag pole (and thusly, under \"The Triangle\" of today). As a result, a left fielder had to play part of the territory running uphill (and back down). Boston's first star left fielder, Duffy Lewis, mastered the skill so well that the area became known as \"Duffy's Cliff\".\nThe incline served two purposes: it was a support for a high wall and it was built to compensate for the difference in grades between the field and Lansdowne Street on the other side of that wall. The wall also served as a spectator-friendly seating area during the dead ball era when overflow crowds, in \"front\" of the later Green Monster, would sit on the incline behind ropes.\nAs part of the 1934 remodeling of the ballpark, the bleachers, and the wall itself, Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey arranged to flatten the ground along the base of the wall, so that Duffy's Cliff no longer existed. The base of the left field wall is several feet below the grade level of Lansdowne Street, accounting for the occasional rat that might spook the scoreboard operators.\nThere has been debate as to the true left field distance, which was once posted as . A reporter from \"The Boston Globe\" was able to sneak into Fenway Park and measure the distance. When the paper's evidence was presented to the club in 1995, the distance was remeasured by the Red Sox and restated at . The companion sign remained unchanged until 1998, when it was corrected to .\nDell EMC Club.\nIn 1983, private suites were added to the roof behind home plate. In 1988, 610 stadium club seats enclosed in glass and named the \"600 Club\", were added above the home plate grandstand replacing the existing press box. The press box was then added to the top of the 600 Club. The 1988 addition has been thought to have changed the air currents in the park to the detriment of hitters. In 2002, the organization renamed the club seats the \".406 Club\" (in honor of Ted Williams' batting average in 1941).\nBetween the 2005 and 2006 seasons the existing .406 club was rebuilt as part of the continuing ballpark expansion efforts. The second deck now features two open-air levels: the bottom level is the new \"Dell EMC Club\" featuring 406 seats and concierge services and the upper level, the State Street Pavilion, has 374 seats and a dedicated standing room area. The added seats are wider than the previous seats.\nProgram hawkers.\nIn 1990, Mike Rutstein started handing out the first issue of \"Boston Baseball Magazine\" (originally called \"Baseball Underground\") outside of the park. He was frustrated with the quality of the program being sold inside the park, which also came out once every two months. The program was sold for $1, half the cost of the programs inside the park. To sell the program, Rutstein's employees would stand outside the park wearing bright red shirts and greet fans by holding a program up and shouting \"Program, Scorecard, One Dollar!\". By 1992, the Red Sox organization filed complaints with the city code enforcement arguing that the scorecard inside the magazine was not covered under the First Amendment protecting magazines and that Rutstein's employees were operating on the streets without a permit. Despite a lot of attention in the news, Rutstein said the charges were not pursued and no further legal action was taken. In 2012, one of Rutstein's long time employees Sly Egidio quit Boston Baseball to start \"The Yawkey Way Report\" named after Yawkey Way. By that time, Boston Baseball was selling for $3 per program, $2 cheaper than the in-park programs selling for $5. The Yawkey Way Report cost $1 and Egidio stationed his hawkers close to Boston Baseball's hawkers, starting a \"hawker war.\" The Yawkey Way Report also came with baseball cards, ponchos and tote bags, which caused Rutstein to file his own complaints with Boston city code enforcement. Despite the rivalry, both programs continue to be hawked outside of Fenway Park and are often the first thing fans see when they approach the stadium on game-day.\nPark usage.\nBaseball.\nThe Red Sox's one-time cross-town rivals, the Boston Braves used Fenway Park for the 1914 World Series and the 1915 season until Braves Field was completed; ironically, the Red Sox would then use Braves Field \u2013 which had a much higher seating capacity \u2013 for their own World Series games in 1915 and 1916.\nNeil Diamond's \"Sweet Caroline\" has been played at Fenway Park since at least 1997, and in the middle of the eighth inning at every game since 2002 (plus since 2020, in doubleheaders upon a home win thru 6.5 innings). On opening night of the 2010 season at Fenway Park, the song was performed by Diamond himself.\nSince 1990 (except in 2005 when, because of field work, it was held in a minor league ballpark, and 2020, as the tournament was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic), Fenway Park has also hosted the final round of a Boston-area intercollegiate baseball tournament called the Baseball Beanpot, an equivalent to the more well-known hockey Beanpot tourney. The teams play the first rounds in minor league stadiums before moving on to Fenway for the final and a consolation game. Boston College, Harvard University, Northeastern University, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst compete in the four-team tournament.\nBeginning in 2006, the Red Sox have hosted the \"Futures at Fenway\" event, where two of their minor-league affiliates play a regular-season doubleheader as the \"home\" teams. Before the Futures day started, the most recent minor-league game held at Fenway had been the Eastern League All-Star Game in 1977.\nThe 2009 Atlantic Coast Conference Baseball Tournament was scheduled to be held at Fenway Park, but a scheduling conflict caused the 2010 tournament to be scheduled at Fenway Park instead. Due to economic reasons, the ACC elected to move the 2010 tournament from Fenway Park to NewBridge Bank Park in Greensboro, North Carolina, but is still looking to host a tournament at Fenway Park in the future.\nFrom 1970 to 1987, the Cape Cod Baseball League (CCBL) played its annual all-star game at various major league stadiums. The games were interleague contests between the CCBL and the Atlantic Collegiate Baseball League (ACBL). The 1975, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1983, 1985 and 1987 games were played at Fenway. The MVP of the 1977 contest was future major league slugger Steve Balboni, who clobbered two home runs over the Green Monster that day. The CCBL returned to Fenway in 2009, 2010 and 2011 for its intraleague all-star game matching the league's East and West divisions. The 2009 game starred East division MVP and future Boston Red Sox Chris Sale of Florida Gulf Coast University. The CCBL also holds an annual workout day at Fenway where CCBL players are evaluated by major league scouts.\nBoxing.\nOn October 9, 1920, Fenway Park was the site of the first open-air boxing show in Boston. The card featured four bouts. Although Eddie Shevlin and Paul Doyle fought in the feature bout, Daniel J. Saunders of the \"Boston Daily Globe\" described heavyweights Battling McCreery and John Lester Johnson as \"the only boxers who caused any excitement\". McCreery, who according to Saunders, \"was to take a flop in five rounds\", won by judge's decision in ten rounds. After the fight, Johnson punched McCreery while McCreery was trying to shake his hand. McCreery then knocked Johnson out of the ring and hit him over the head with his chair. The card drew 5,000 spectators (half of what was expected) and brought in $6,100 (several thousand less than what was promised to the fighters).\nIn 1928, New England Welterweight Champion Al Mello headlined three cards at Fenway. He defeated Billy Murphy in front of a crowd of 12,000 on June 26, Charlie Donovan on August 31, and Murphy again on September 13.\nOn July 2, 1930, future World Heavyweight Champion James J. Braddock made his debut in that weight class. He defeated Joe Monte in ten rounds.\nOn September 2, 1930, Babe Hunt defeated Ernie Schaaf in what \"The Boston Daily Globe\" described as a \"dull bout\" and a \"big disappointment\". The undercard included future light heavyweight champion George Nichols, who defeated Harry Allen of Brockton, Massachusetts in ten rounds.\nIn 1932, Eddie Mack promoted ten cards at Fenway Park. The August 2 card featured World Light Heavyweight Champion Maxie Rosenbloom defeating Joe Barlow of Roxbury and Taunton' Henry Emond defeating The Cocoa Kid. On August 23, Dave Shade defeated Norman Conrad of Wilton, New Hampshire in front of 3,500 attendees. The September 6 card was headlined by World junior lightweight champion Kid Chocolate, who defeated Steve Smith.\nOn June 25, 1936, former world heavyweight champion Jack Sharkey defeated Phil Brubaker in what would be his final career victory.\nIn 1937, Rip Valenti and the Goodwin Athletic Club promoted five cards at Fenway. Three of these were headlined by New England Heavyweight Champion Al McCoy. On June 16 McCoy defeated Natie Brown in front of a crowd of 4,516. On July 29 he knocked out Jack McCarthy in the third round. On August 24 he and Tony Shucco fought to a draw. Future WBA featherweight champion Sal Bartolo fought one of his first professional fights on the May 24 undercard.\nOn June 25, 1945, Tami Mauriello knocked out Lou Nova in 2:47. An estimated crowd of 8,000 was in attendance.\nOn July 12, 1954, Tony DeMarco knocked out George Araujo 58 seconds into the fifth round in front of 12,000 spectators.\nThe most recent boxing event at Fenway took place on June 16, 1956. The undercard consisted of Eddie Andrews vs. George Chimenti, Bobby Courchesne vs. George Monroe for the New England Lightweight Championship, and Barry Allison vs. Don Williams for the New England Middleweight Championship. In the main event, Tony DeMarco defeated Vince Martinez by decision. An estimated 15,000 were in attendance - far below promoter Sam Silverman's expectations.\nSoccer.\nOn October 17, 1925, the Boston Soccer Club and the Fall River Marksmen of the American Soccer League played a scoreless tie before 4,000 fans. Boston also hosted the Providence Clamdiggers and Indiana Flooring at Fenway later that season. On June 18, 1928, Boston played Rangers F.C. to a 2\u20132 tie in front of a crowd of 10,000. In 1929, Boston hosted two more matches at Fenway Park; a 3\u20132 victory over the New Bedford Whalers on August 10 and a 3\u20132 loss to Fall River on August 17.\nOn May 30, 1931; 8,000 fans were on hand to see the American Soccer League champion New York Yankees defeat Celtic 4\u20133. The Yankees goalkeeper, Johnny Reder, would later return to play for the Boston Red Sox. During 1968, the park was home to the Boston Beacons of the now-defunct NASL.\nOn July 21, 2010 Fenway hosted an exhibition game between European soccer clubs Celtic F.C. and Sporting C.P. in an event called \"Football at Fenway\". A crowd of 32,162 watched the two teams play to a 1\u20131 draw. Celtic won 6\u20135 on penalty shoot out, winning the first \"Fenway football challenge Trophy\". Recent matches have taken place between Liverpool, an English Premier League club owned by Fenway Sports Group, and A.S. Roma, an Italian Serie A club owned by FSG partner Thomas R. DiBenedetto. The July 25, 2012 match ended in a 2\u20131 win for AS Roma before a crowd of 37,169. AS Roma also won the rematch on July 23, 2014 by a score of 1\u20130. On July 21, 2019 Liverpool returned to Fenway for a preseason match against Sevilla, the Spanish team won 2\u20131 at the end of full-time.\nAmerican Football.\nFootball has been played at Fenway since at least 1916; In 1926, the first American Football League's Boston Bulldogs played at both Fenway and Braves Field; the Boston Shamrocks of the second AFL did the same in 1936 and 1937. The National Football League's Boston Redskins played at Fenway for four seasons (1933\u20131936) after playing their inaugural season in 1932 at Braves Field as the Boston Braves. The Boston Yanks played there in the 1940s; and the American Football League's Boston Patriots called Fenway Park home from 1963 to 1968 after moving there from Nickerson Field. At various times in the past, Dartmouth College, Boston College, Brown University, and Boston University teams have also played football games at Fenway Park. Boston College and Notre Dame played a game at Fenway in 2015 as part of Notre Dame's Shamrock Series. The annual Harvard\u2013Yale game in November 2018 was played at Fenway. Beginning in 2021, a new bowl game at Fenway called the Fenway Bowl will pit a team from the Atlantic Coast Conference against a team from the American Athletic Conference.\nHockey.\nThe third annual NHL Winter Classic was held at Fenway on New Year's Day in 2010. The Boston Bruins beat the Philadelphia Flyers 2\u20131 in sudden-death overtime, securing the first home-team victory in the relatively short history of the NHL Winter Classic. The Winter Classic paved the way for the Frozen Fenway series of ice skating and hockey events at the ballpark. Frozen Fenway is an annual series of collegiate and amateur games featuring ice hockey teams from local and regional high schools, colleges, and universities, including the University of Connecticut, University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of New Hampshire, University of Maine, University of Vermont, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Northeastern University, Boston College, and Boston University, and is held during the first part of the event. After the completion of the hockey series, the rink was opened to the public for free ice skating.\nHurling and Gaelic Football.\nFenway has hosted Gaelic games over the years. On June 6, 1937, the All-Ireland Football Champions from County Mayo defeated a Massachusetts team, 17\u20138, and on November 8, 1954, the All-Ireland Hurling champions County Cork beat an American line-up, 37\u201328. In more recent times, the Fenway Hurling Classic for the Players Champions Cup has been staged, first in November 2015 when Galway beat Dublin, and subsequently in November 2017 and November 2018.\nConcerts.\nFenway has been home to several concerts beginning in 1973 when Stevie Wonder and Ray Charles first played there. No further concerts were played there until 2003 when Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band played a leg of their The Rising Tour.\nSince 2003, there has been at least one concert every year at Fenway by such artists as Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, Jimmy Buffett, Billy Joel, The Rolling Stones, Neil Diamond, The Police, Jason Aldean, Dave Matthews Band, Tom Petty &amp; The Heartbreakers, Aerosmith, Phish, Roger Waters, Paul McCartney, James Taylor, Pearl Jam, Foo Fighters, and Dead &amp; Company. In 2017, Lady Gaga brought her Joanne World Tour to the stadium, making her the first woman to headline a concert there. In 2019, The Who played their first ever show at the stadium with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.\nSki and snowboard.\nPolartec Big Air At Fenway is the first big air snowboarding and skiing competition that was held on February 11\u201312, 2016. This event was part of the U.S. Grand Prix Tour and the International Ski Federation's World Tour. Notable winter athletes that competed are Ty Walker, Sage Kotsenburg, and Joss Christensen. The big air jump was constructed to be about tall, standing above the lights of the stadium. \nPublic address announcers.\nFrank Fallon was the first public address (PA) announcer for the Red Sox, and held the job from 1953 to 1957. Fred Cusick, better known for his career of announcing Boston Bruins hockey games, joined him in 1956 and also left after 1957. Jay McMaster took over in 1958, until his replacement by Sherm Feller in 1967. Feller served as the announcer for 26 years until his death after the 1993 season. He was known for beginning his games by welcoming the fans with \"Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls. Welcome to Fenway Park\", and ending them by saying \"Thank you.\" Leslie Sterling took the job for the 1994 season, becoming the second female PA announcer in the history of Major League Baseball. Ed Brickley took over in 1997, and was replaced by Carl Beane in 2003. Beane was regarded as an \"iconic\" announcer, and served until his death in 2012, which was caused by a heart attack suffered while driving. Fenway used a series of guest announcers to finish the 2012 season before hiring its current announcers: Henry Mahegan, Bob Lobel, and Dick Flavin.\nRetired numbers.\nThere are eleven retired numbers above the right field grandstand. All of the numbers retired by the Red Sox are red on a white circle. Jackie Robinson's 42, which was retired by Major League Baseball, is blue on a white circle. The two are further delineated through the font difference; Boston numbers are in the same style as the Red Sox jerseys, while Robinson's number is in the more traditional \"block\" numbering found on the Dodgers jerseys.\nUntil the late 1990s, the numbers originally hung on the right-field facade in the order in which they were retired: 9-4-1-8. It was pointed out that the numbers, when read as a date (9/4/18), marked the eve of the first game of the 1918 World Series, the last championship that the Red Sox won before 2004. After the facade was repainted, the numbers were rearranged in numerical order. The numbers remained in numerical order until the 2012 season, when the numbers were rearranged back into the order in which they were retired by the Red Sox.\nThe Red Sox policy on retiring uniform numbers was once one of the most stringent in baseball\u2014the player had to be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, play at least 10 years with the team, and retire as a member of the Red Sox. The final requirement was waived for Carlton Fisk as he had finished his playing career with the Chicago White Sox. However, Fisk was assigned a Red Sox front office job and effectively \"finished\" his baseball career with the Red Sox in this manner. In 2008, the ownership relaxed the requirements further with the retirement of Johnny Pesky's number 6. Pesky has not been inducted into the Hall of Fame, but in light of his over 50 years of service to the club, the management made an exception. Pesky would have had 10 seasons, but he was credited with the three seasons he served as an Operations Officer in the U.S. Navy during World War II. The most recent number retired was 34, worn by 2013 World Series Most Valuable Player David \"Big Papi\" Ortiz.\nGround rules.\nIt is a misconception among fans that a fly ball that gets stuck in the ladder above the scoreboard on the left field wall is ruled a ground rule triple. There is no mention of it in the Red Sox ground rules list."}
{"id": "11240", "revid": "13715272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11240", "title": "Flatulence", "text": "Flatulence is defined in the medical literature as \"flatus expelled through the anus\" or the \"quality or state of being flatulent\", which is defined in turn as \"marked by or affected with gases generated in the intestine or stomach; likely to cause digestive flatulence\". The root of these words is from the Latin \u2013 \"a blowing, a breaking wind\". Flatus is also the medical word for gas generated in the stomach or bowels. Despite these standard definitions, a proportion of intestinal gas may be swallowed environmental air, and hence flatus is not totally generated in the stomach or bowels. The scientific study of this area of medicine is termed flatology.\nFlatus is brought to the rectum and pressurized by muscles in the intestines. It is normal to pass flatus, though volume and frequency vary greatly among individuals. It is also normal for intestinal gas to have a feculent odor, which may be intense. The noise commonly associated with flatulence (\"blowing a raspberry\") is produced by the anus and buttocks, which act together in a manner similar to that of an embouchure. Both the sound and the smell are sources of embarrassment, annoyance or flatulence humor.\nThere are several general symptoms related to intestinal gas: pain, bloating and abdominal distension, excessive flatus volume, excessive flatus smell, and gas incontinence. Furthermore, eructation (\"an act or instance of belching\", colloquially known as \"burping\") is sometimes included under the topic of flatulence. When excessive or malodorous, flatus can be a sign of a health disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome, celiac disease or lactose intolerance.\nTerminology.\nNon-medical definitions of the term include \"the uncomfortable condition of having gas in the stomach and bowels\", or \"a state of excessive gas in the alimentary canal\". These definitions highlight that many people consider \"bloating\", abdominal distension or increased volume of intestinal gas, to be synonymous with the term flatulence (although this is technically inaccurate). Colloquially, flatulence may be referred to as \"farting\", \"pumping\", \"trumping\", \"blowing off\", \"pooting\", \"passing gas\", \"breaking wind\", \"backfiring\", or simply (in American English) \"gas\" or (British English) \"wind\". Derived terms include vaginal flatulence, otherwise known as a \"queef\".\nSigns and symptoms.\nGenerally speaking, there are four different types of complaints that relate to intestinal gas, which may present individually or in combination.\nBloating and pain.\nPatients may complain of bloating as abdominal distension, discomfort and pain from \"trapped wind\". In the past, functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome that produced symptoms of bloating were attributed to increased production of intestinal gas. However, three significant pieces of evidence refute this theory. First, in normal subjects, even very high rates of gas infusion into the small intestine (30mL/min) is tolerated without complaints of pain or bloating and harmlessly passed as flatus per rectum. Secondly, studies aiming to quantify the total volume of gas produced by patients with irritable bowel syndrome (some including gas emitted from the mouth by eructation) have consistently failed to demonstrate increased volumes compared to healthy subjects. The proportion of hydrogen produced may be increased in some patients with irritable bowel syndrome, but this does not affect the total volume. Thirdly, the volume of flatus produced by patients with irritable bowel syndrome who have pain and abdominal distension would be tolerated in normal subjects without any complaints of pain.\nPatients who complain of bloating frequently can be shown to have objective increases in abdominal girth, often increased throughout the day and then resolving during sleep. The increase in girth combined with the fact that the total volume of flatus is not increased led to studies aiming to image the distribution of intestinal gas in patients with bloating. They found that gas was not distributed normally in these patients: there was segmental gas pooling and focal distension. In conclusion, abdominal distension, pain and bloating symptoms are the result of abnormal intestinal gas dynamics rather than increased flatus production.\nExcessive volume.\nAs mentioned above, the normal range of volumes of flatus in normal individuals varies hugely (476\u20131,491\u2009mL/24\u2009h). All intestinal gas is either swallowed environmental air, present intrinsically in foods and beverages, or the result of gut fermentation. Swallowing small amounts of air occurs while eating and drinking. This is emitted from the mouth by eructation (burping) and is normal. Excessive swallowing of environmental air is called aerophagia, and has been shown in a few case reports to be responsible for increased flatus volume. This is, however, considered a rare cause of increased flatus volume. Gases contained in food and beverages are likewise emitted largely through eructation, e.g., carbonated beverages. Endogenously produced intestinal gases make up 74 percent of flatus in normal subjects. The volume of gas produced is partially dependent upon the composition of the intestinal microbiota, which is normally very resistant to change, but is also very different in different individuals. Some patients are predisposed to increased endogenous gas production by virtue of their gut microbiota composition. The greatest concentration of gut bacteria is in the colon, while the small intestine is normally nearly sterile. Fermentation occurs when unabsorbed food residues may arrive in the colon. Therefore, even more than the composition of the microbiota, diet is the primary factor that dictates the volume of flatus produced. Diets that aim to reduce the amount of undigested fermentable food residues arriving in the colon have been shown to significantly reduce the volume of flatus produced. Again, increased volume of intestinal gas will not cause bloating and pain in normal subjects. Abnormal intestinal gas dynamics will create pain, distension, and bloating, regardless of whether there is high or low total flatus volume.\nSmell.\nAlthough flatus possesses physiological smell, this may be abnormally increased in some patients and cause social distress to the patient. Increased smell of flatus presents a distinct clinical issue from other complaints related to intestinal gas. Some patients may exhibit over-sensitivity to bad flatus smell, and in extreme forms, olfactory reference syndrome may be diagnosed. Recent informal research found a correlation between flatus smell and both loudness and humidity content \nIncontinence of flatus.\n\"Gas incontinence\" could be defined as loss of voluntary control over the passage of flatus. It is a recognised subtype of faecal incontinence, and is usually related to minor disruptions of the continence mechanisms. Some consider gas incontinence to be the first, sometimes only, symptom of faecal incontinence.\nCause.\nIntestinal gas is composed of varying quantities of exogenous sources and endogenous sources. The exogenous gases are swallowed (aerophagia) when eating or drinking or increased swallowing during times of excessive salivation (as might occur when nauseated or as the result of gastroesophageal reflux disease). The endogenous gases are produced either as a by-product of digesting certain types of food, or of incomplete digestion, as is the case during steatorrhea. Anything that causes food to be incompletely digested by the stomach or small intestine may cause flatulence when the material arrives in the large intestine, due to fermentation by yeast or prokaryotes normally or abnormally present in the gastrointestinal tract.\nFlatulence-producing foods are typically high in certain polysaccharides, especially oligosaccharides such as inulin. Those foods include beans, lentils, dairy products, onions, garlic, spring onions, leeks, turnips, swedes, radishes, sweet potatoes, potatoes, cashews, Jerusalem artichokes, oats, wheat, and yeast in breads. Cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts and other cruciferous vegetables that belong to the genus \"Brassica\" are commonly reputed to not only increase flatulence, but to increase the pungency of the flatus.\nIn beans, endogenous gases seem to arise from complex oligosaccharides (carbohydrates) that are particularly resistant to digestion by mammals, but are readily digestible by gut flora \u2013 microorganisms (methane-producing archaea; \"Methanobrevibacter smithii\") that inhabit the digestive tract. These oligosaccharides pass through the upper intestine largely unchanged, and when they reach the lower intestine, bacteria feed on them, producing copious amounts of flatus.\nWhen excessive or malodorous, flatus can be a sign of a health disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome, celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity or lactose intolerance. It can also be caused by certain medicines, such as ibuprofen, laxatives, antifungal medicines or statins. Some infections, such as giardiasis, are also associated with flatulence.\nInterest in the causes of flatulence was spurred by high-altitude flight and human spaceflight; the low atmospheric pressure, confined conditions, and stresses peculiar to those endeavours were cause for concern. In the field of mountaineering, the phenomenon of high altitude flatus expulsion was first recorded over two hundred years ago.\nMechanism.\nProduction, composition, and smell.\nFlatus (intestinal gas) is mostly produced as a byproduct of bacterial fermentation in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, especially the colon. There are reports of aerophagia (excessive air swallowing) causing excessive intestinal gas, but this is considered rare. Over 99% of the volume of flatus is composed of odorless gases. These include oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and methane. Nitrogen is not produced in the gut, but a component of environmental air. Patients who have excessive intestinal gas that is mostly composed of nitrogen have aerophagia. Hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane are all produced in the gut and contribute 74% of the volume of flatus in normal subjects. Methane and hydrogen are flammable, and so flatus can be ignited if it contains adequate amounts of these components. Not all humans produce flatus that contains methane. For example, in one study of the faeces of nine adults, only five of the samples contained archaea capable of producing methane. The prevalence of methane over hydrogen in human farts may correlate with obesity, constipation and irritable bowel syndrome, as archaea that oxidise hydrogen into methane promote the metabolism's ability to absorb fatty acids from food.\nThe remaining trace (&lt;1% volume) compounds give flatus its smell. Historically, compounds such as indole, skatole, ammonia and short chain fatty acids were thought to cause the smell of flatus. More recent evidence proves that the major contribution to the smell of flatus comes from a combination of volatile sulfur compounds. Hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan (also known as methanethiol), dimethyl sulfide, dimethyl disulfide and dimethyl trisulfide are present in flatus. The benzopyrrole volatiles indole and skatole have a mothball smell, and therefore probably do not contribute greatly to the characteristic smell of flatus.\nIn one study, hydrogen sulfide concentration was shown to correlate convincingly with perceived bad smell of flatus, followed by methyl mercaptan and dimethyl sulfide. This is supported by the fact that hydrogen sulfide may be the most abundant volatile sulfur compound present. These results were generated from subjects who were eating a diet high in pinto beans to stimulate flatus production. Others report that methyl mercaptan was the greatest contributor to the smell of flatus in patients not under any specific dietary alterations. It has now been demonstrated that methyl mercaptan, dimethyl sulfide, and hydrogen sulfide (described as decomposing vegetables, unpleasantly sweet/wild radish and rotten eggs respectively) are all present in human flatus in concentrations above their smell perception thresholds. It is known that increased dietary sulfur-containing amino acids significantly increases the smell of flatus. It is therefore likely that the smell of flatus is created by a combination of volatile sulfur compounds, with minimal contribution from non-sulfur volatiles. Such smell can also be caused by the presence of large numbers of microflora bacteria or the presence of faeces in the rectum. Diets high in protein, especially sulfur-containing amino acids, have been demonstrated to significantly increase the smell of flatus.\nVolume and intestinal gas dynamics.\nNormal flatus volume is 476 to 1491 mL per 24 hours. This variability between individuals is greatly dependent upon diet. Similarly, the number of flatus episodes per day is variable; the normal range is given as 8\u201320 per day. The volume of flatus associated with each flatulence event again varies (5\u2013375\u00a0mL). The volume of the first flatulence upon waking in the morning is significantly larger than those during the day. This may be due to buildup of intestinal gas in the colon during sleep, the peak in peristaltic activity in the first few hours after waking or the strong prokinetic effect of rectal distension on the rate of transit of intestinal gas. It is now known that gas is moved along the gut independently of solids and liquids, and this transit is more efficient in the erect position compared to when supine. It is thought that large volumes of intestinal gas present low resistance, and can be propelled by subtle changes in gut tone, capacitance and proximal contraction and distal relaxation. This process is thought not to affect solid and liquid intra-lumenal contents.\nResearchers investigating the role of sensory nerve endings in the anal canal did not find them to be essential for retaining fluids in the anus, and instead speculate that their role may be to distinguish between flatus and faeces, thereby helping detect a need to defecate or to signal the end of defecation.\nThe sound varies depending on the tightness of the sphincter muscle and velocity of the gas being propelled, as well as other factors, such as water and body fat. The auditory pitch (sound) of the flatulence outburst can also be affected by the anal embouchure. Among humans, flatulence occasionally happens accidentally, such as incidentally to coughing or sneezing or during orgasm; on other occasions, flatulence can be voluntarily elicited by tensing the rectum or \"bearing down\" on stomach or bowel muscles and subsequently relaxing the anal sphincter, resulting in the expulsion of flatus.\nManagement.\nSince problems involving intestinal gas present as different (but sometimes combined) complaints, the management is cause-related.\nPain and bloating.\nWhile not affecting the production of the gases themselves, surfactants (agents that lower surface tension) can reduce the disagreeable sensations associated with flatulence, by aiding the dissolution of the gases into liquid and solid faecal matter. Preparations containing simethicone reportedly operate by promoting the coalescence of smaller bubbles into larger ones more easily passed from the body, either by burping or flatulence. Such preparations do not decrease the total amount of gas generated in or passed from the colon, but make the bubbles larger and thereby allowing them to be passed more easily.\nOther drugs including prokinetics, lubiprostone, antibiotics and probiotics are also used to treat bloating in patients with functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome, and there is some evidence that these measures may reduce symptoms.\nA flexible tube, inserted into the rectum, can be used to collect intestinal gas in a flatus bag. This method is occasionally needed in a hospital setting, when the patient is unable to pass gas normally.\nVolume.\nOne method of reducing the volume of flatus produced is dietary modification, reducing the amount of fermentable carbohydrates. This is the theory behind diets such as the low-FODMAP diet (low fermentable oligosaccharide, disacharide, monosaccharide and polyols).\nCertain spices have been reported to counteract the production of intestinal gas, most notably the closely related cumin, coriander, caraway, fennel and others such as ajwain, turmeric, asafoetida (hing), epazote, and kombu kelp (a Japanese seaweed). Most starches, including potatoes, corn, noodles, and wheat, produce gas as they are broken down in the large intestine. Intestinal gas can be reduced by fermenting the beans, and making them less gas-inducing, or by cooking them in the liquor from a previous batch. For example, the fermented bean product miso is less likely to produce as much intestinal gas. Some legumes also stand up to prolonged cooking, which can help break down the oligosaccharides into simple sugars. Fermentative lactic acid bacteria such as \"Lactobacillus casei\" and \"Lactobacillus plantarum\" reduce flatulence in the human intestinal tract.\nProbiotics (live yogurt, kefir, etc.) are reputed to reduce flatulence when used to restore balance to the normal intestinal flora. Live (bioactive) yogurt contains, among other lactic bacteria, \"Lactobacillus acidophilus\", which may be useful in reducing flatulence. \"L. acidophilus\" may make the intestinal environment more acidic, supporting a natural balance of the fermentative processes. \"L. acidophilus\" is available in supplements. Prebiotics, which generally are non-digestible oligosaccharides, such as fructooligosaccharide, generally increase flatulence in a similar way as described for lactose intolerance.\nDigestive enzyme supplements may significantly reduce the amount of flatulence caused by some components of foods not being digested by the body and thereby promoting the action of microbes in the small and large intestines. It has been suggested that alpha-galactosidase enzymes, which can digest certain complex sugars, are effective in reducing the volume and frequency of flatus. The enzymes alpha-galactosidase, lactase, amylase, lipase, protease, cellulase, glucoamylase, invertase, malt diastase, pectinase, and bromelain are available, either individually or in combination blends, in commercial products.\nThe antibiotic rifaximin, often used to treat diarrhea caused by the microorganism \"E. coli\", may reduce both the production of intestinal gas and the frequency of flatus events.\nSmell.\nBismuth\nSmell from flatulence is commonly treated with bismuth subgallate, available over-the-counter in the US as Devrom. Bismuth subgallate is commonly used by individuals who have had ostomy surgery, bariatric surgery, faecal incontinence and irritable bowel syndrome. Bismuth subsalicylate is a compound that binds hydrogen sulfide, and one study reported a dose of 524\u00a0mg four times a day for 3\u20137 days bismuth subsalicylate yielded a &gt;95% reduction in faecal hydrogen sulfide release in both humans and rats.\nAnother bismuth compound, bismuth subnitrate was also shown to bind to hydrogen sulfide. Another study showed that bismuth acted synergistically with various antibiotics to inhibit sulfate-reducing gut bacteria and sulfide production. Some authors proposed a theory that hydrogen sulfide was involved in the development of ulcerative colitis and that bismuth might be helpful in the management of this condition. However, bismuth administration in rats did not prevent them from developing ulcerative colitis despite reduced hydrogen sulfide production. Also, evidence suggests that colonic hydrogen sulfide is largely present in bound forms, probably sulfides of iron and other metals. Rarely, serious bismuth toxicity may occur with higher doses.\n Activated charcoal\nDespite being an ancient treatment for various digestive complaints, activated charcoal did not produce reduction in both the total flatus volume nor the release of sulfur-containing gasses, and there was no reduction in abdominal symptoms (after 0.52g activated charcoal four times a day for one week). The authors suggested that saturation of charcoal binding sites during its passage through the gut was the reason for this. A further study concluded that activated charcoal (4g) does not influence gas formation in vitro or in vivo. Other authors reported that activated charcoal was effective. A study in 8 dogs concluded activated charcoal (unknown oral dose) reduced hydrogen sulfide levels by 71%. In combination with yucca schidigera, and zinc acetate, this was increased to an 86% reduction in hydrogen sulfide, although flatus volume and number was unchanged. An early study reported activated charcoal (unknown oral dose) prevented a large increase in the number of flatus events and increased breath hydrogen concentrations that normally occur following a gas-producing meal.\nGarments and external devices\nIn 1998, Chester \"Buck\" Weimer of Pueblo, Colorado, received a patent for the first undergarment that contained a replaceable charcoal filter. The undergarments are air-tight and provide a pocketed escape hole in which a charcoal filter can be inserted. In 2001 Mr Weimer received the Ig Nobel Prize for Biology for his invention.\nA similar product was released in 2002, but rather than an entire undergarment, consumers are able to purchase an insert similar to a pantiliner that contains activated charcoal. The inventors, Myra and Brian Conant of Mililani, Hawaii, still claim on their website to have discovered the undergarment product in 2002 (four years after Chester Weimer filed for a patent for his product), but state that their tests \"concluded\" that they should release an insert instead.\nIncontinence.\nFlatus incontinence where there is involuntary passage of gas, is a type of faecal incontinence, and is managed similarly.\nSociety and culture.\nIn many cultures, flatulence in public is regarded as embarrassing, but, depending on context, can also be considered humorous. People will often strain to hold in the passing of gas when in polite company, or position themselves to silence the passing of gas. In other cultures, it may be no more embarrassing than coughing.\nWhile the act of passing flatus in said cultures is generally considered to be an unfortunate occurrence in public settings, flatulence may, in casual circumstances and especially among children, be used as either a humorous supplement to a joke (\"pull my finger\"), or as a comic activity in and of itself. The social acceptability of flatulence-based humour in entertainment and the mass media varies over the course of time and between cultures. Enough entertainers performed with their flatus that the term flatulist was coined. The whoopee cushion is a joking device invented in the early 20th century for simulating a fart. In 2008, a farting application for the iPhone earned nearly $10,000 in one day.\nA farting game named \"Touch Wood\" was documented by John Gregory Bourke in the 1890s. It existed under the name of \"Safety\" in the 20th century in the U.S., and has been found being played in 2011.\nIn January 2011, the Malawi Minister of Justice, George Chaponda, said that Air Fouling Legislation would make public farting illegal in his country. When reporting the story, the media satirised Chaponda's statement with punning headlines. Later, the minister withdrew his statement.\nEnvironmental impact.\nFlatulence is often blamed as a significant source of greenhouse gases, owing to the erroneous belief that the methane released by livestock is in the flatus. While livestock account for around 20% of global methane emissions, 90\u201395% of that is released by exhaling or burping. In cows, gas and burps are produced by methane-generating microbes called methanogens, that live inside the cow's digestive system. Proposals for reducing methane production in cows include the feeding of supplements such as oregano and seaweed, and the genetic engineering of gut biome microbes to produce less methane.\nSince New Zealand produces large amounts of agricultural products, it is in the unique position of having high methane emissions from livestock compared to other greenhouse gas sources. The New Zealand government is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol and therefore attempts are being made to reduce greenhouse emissions. To achieve this, an agricultural emissions research levy was proposed, which promptly became known as a \"fart tax\" or \"flatulence tax\". It encountered opposition from farmers, farming lobby groups and opposition politicians.\nEntertainment.\nHistorical comment on the ability to fart at will is observed as early as Saint Augustine's \"The City of God\" (5th century A.D.). Augustine mentions men who \"have such command of their bowels, that they can break wind continuously at will, so as to produce the effect of singing\". Intentional passing of gas and its use as entertainment for others appear to have been somewhat well known in pre-modern Europe, according to mentions of it in medieval and later literature, including Rabelais.\nLe P\u00e9tomane (\"the Fartomaniac\") was a famous French performer in the 19th century who, as well as many professional farters before him, did flatulence impressions and held shows. The performer Mr. Methane carries on le P\u00e9tomane's tradition today. Also, a 2002 fiction film \"Thunderpants\" revolves around a boy named Patrick Smash who has an ongoing flatulence problem from the time of his birth. He eventually overcomes his problems and fulfills his dreams, including one of becoming an astronaut.\nIn literature, farting features prominently in the novel \"The Catcher in the Rye\". Since the 1970s, farting has increasingly been featured in film, especially comedies such as \"Blazing Saddles\" and \"Scooby-Doo\".\nReligion.\nIn Islam, flatulence invalidates \"wudu\" (ritual purity).\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "11243", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11243", "title": "Filter", "text": "Filter, filtering or filters may refer to:"}
{"id": "11244", "revid": "40899096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11244", "title": "Free Methodist Church", "text": "The Free Methodist Church is a Methodist Christian denomination within the holiness movement, based in the United States. It is evangelical in nature and is Wesleyan-Arminian in theology.\nThe Free Methodist Church has 77,000 members in the United States and 1,055,000 members worldwide in 82 nations. The \"Light &amp; Life Magazine\" is their official publication. The Free Methodist Church World Ministries Center is in Indianapolis, Indiana.\nHistory.\nThe Free Methodist Church was organized at Pekin, New York, in 1860. The founders had been members of the Methodist Episcopal Church but were excluded from its membership for too earnestly advocating what they saw as the doctrines and usages of authentic Wesleyan Methodism. Under the leadership of the Rev. Benjamin Titus (B. T.) Roberts, a graduate of Wesleyan University and an able and eloquent preacher, the movement spread rapidly. Societies were organized, churches built and the work established.\nAt the 1910 session of the General Conference of the Methodist Church at Rochester, New York, a full acknowledgement was made of the wrong done to Roberts fifty years before, and the credentials unjustly taken from him were restored in a public meeting to his son, Rev. Benson Roberts.\nBefore the founding of the church, Roberts began publication of a monthly journal, \"The Earnest Christian\". In 1868, \"The Free Methodist\" (now \"Light &amp; Life\") was begun. A publishing house was established in 1886 to produce books, periodicals and Sunday school curriculum and literature.\nThe name \"Methodist\" was retained for the newly organized church because the founders felt that their misfortunes (expulsion from the Methodist Episcopal Church) had come to them because of their adherence to doctrines and standards of Methodism. The word \"Free\" was suggested and adopted because the new church was anti-slavery. Next, pews were to be free to all rather than sold or rented (as was common), so as to provide full access to the poor. The new church hoped for the freedom of worship in the Holy Spirit, as opposed to a stifling formality. A fourth principle was \"freedom\" from secret and oath-bound societies (in particular the Masonic Lodge), so as to have full loyalty to Christ. Fifth was \"freedom\" from the abuse of ecclesiastical authority (due to the bishop's action in allowing expulsion of 120 clergy and lay). Finally was \"freedom\" to experience transformation in sanctification via the Holy Spirit due to personal consecration and faith versus just 'sin-management' or gradual growth following justification.\nHoliness Conservatives within the Free Methodist Church left to form the Reformed Free Methodist Church in 1932, the United Holiness Church in 1966 (which itself joined the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches in 1994) and also the Evangelical Wesleyan Church in 1963.\nFree Methodist headquarters were located in Winona Lake, Indiana, until 1990 when the denomination moved its headquarters to Indianapolis.\nStatistics.\nThe church has about 77,000 members in the United States. Worldwide its membership is over 1,000,000 with large segments of membership in East Central Africa (Rwanda, Burundi, D.R. of Congo) and India.\nBeliefs and practices.\nIn doctrine, Free Methodists\u2019 beliefs are the standard beliefs of Wesleyan-Arminian Protestantism, with distinctive emphasis on the teaching of entire sanctification as held by John Wesley, to whom the Free Methodist Church traces its origins.\nThe Free Methodist Church, along with the United Methodist Church, shares a common heritage linked to the Methodist revival in England during the 18th century. The Free Methodist Church itself arose within the context of holiness movement within 19th century Methodism.\nWhile some clergy in the Free Methodist Church wear the pulpit robe, others do not wear vestments of any sort during worship.\nThe first general superintendent, B. T. Roberts, was in favor of ordaining women, but never saw it take place in his lifetime. Out of his own conviction he wrote \"Ordaining Women: Biblical and Historical Insights\". The impact of his writings eventually prevailed in the church. The Free Methodist Church affirmed the ordination of women in 1911. As of June 2008, women represented 11% of ordained clergy (216 of 2,011) and 26% of candidates for the ministry.\nFree Methodists recognize and license unordained persons for particular ministries. They mandate lay representation in numbers equal to clergy in the councils of the church.\nAs a reaction to paid musicians in the Methodist Episcopal Church, early Free Methodists enjoyed a capella congregational hymns during worship. However, the General Conference of 1943 voted to allow each Conference to vote on whether or not their churches could have instrumental music. As a result, pianos and organs became common across most conferences. Currently, many churches have worship teams composed of vocalists, drums, keyboards, guitars, and other instruments.\nOrganization.\nThe Free Methodist Church's highest governing body is the World Conference, which is composed of representatives, both lay and clergy, from all countries with a Free Methodist General Conference. As the church in each country develops, its status progresses from Mission District to Annual Conference to General Conference. There are currently 13 General Conferences in the world, which are linked together through the articles of religion and common constitution of the first two chapters of the Book of Discipline, the World Conference, and the Council of Bishops.\nThe USA branch of the Free Methodist Church is currently led by three bishops: Bishop Matthew Whitehead, Bishop Linda Adams, and Bishop Keith Cowart. All three were elected in 2019.\nWorld missions.\nInternational Child Care Ministries (ICCM), a child sponsorship initiative serves more than 21,000 children in 29 countries around the world. Through education, meals and medical care, children in need are given an opportunity for a better life. Each sponsored child is connected to a Free Methodist congregation or ministry at a local level.\nSustainable Empowerment through Economic Development (SEED), a micro-enterprise and livelihood ministry of Free Methodist World Missions, facilitates self-sustaining businesses, training in business skills and Christian discipleship. Focused on economically vulnerable members of the Free Methodist world family, it provides an international market for products produced by Free Methodist artisans.\nVolunteers in Service Abroad (VISA) connects volunteers from the Free Methodist Church in the US and UK with Free Methodist World Missions for hands-on ministry internationally.\nThe church currently has ministry in 82 countries around the world. These include:\nHigher education.\nB. T. Roberts began what is now Roberts Wesleyan College in 1866. Spring Arbor College followed in 1873 (renamed Spring Arbor University in 2001), Seattle Pacific University in 1891 and Greenville College (renamed Greenville University in 2017) in 1892. Central College began in 1914, a continuation of Orleans Seminary begun in 1884. Azusa Pacific University was formed by a merger with Los Angeles Pacific College and other small denominational colleges.\nThe following educational institutions are a part of the Association of Free Methodist Educational Institutions. The schools are not owned by the denomination but meet a set of requirements to maintain this relationship.\nIn addition, the Free Methodist Church is one of several denominations supporting Azusa Pacific University (Azusa, CA). Wessington Springs College is a former, now closed institution which was located in South Dakota. Internationally, there is Osaka Christian College of the Japanese Free Methodist Church, Hope Africa University, a recently founded school in Bujumbura, Burundi, Haiti Providence University, and the Faculdade de Teologia Metodista Livre, S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil.\nThrough the John Wesley Seminary Foundation (JWSF) graduate students who are preparing for full-time ministry in the Free Methodist Church are provided a grant or loan at the following affiliated schools:\nPublishing.\nLike John Wesley before him, B. T. Roberts recognized the Christian's responsibility for publishing.\nBefore the founding of the church in 1860, B. T. Roberts began publication of a monthly journal, \"The Earnest Christian\". In 1868 \"The Free Methodist\" (now \"Light &amp; Life\" Magazine) began. A publishing house was established in 1886 to produce books, periodicals and Sunday school curriculum and literature.\nBeginnings.\nEarly leaders, T. B. Arnold and B. T. Roberts privately financed and produced several publications.\nThe official publishing institution was established by the church at the 1886 General Conference. The church purchased the publishing business built by Rev. T. B. Arnold for $8,000. Arnold was named first publisher and B. T. Roberts was elected editor of \"The Free Methodist\". The Free Methodist Publishing House is recognized under its trade name Light and Life Press.\nGrowth and development.\nThe Free Methodist Publishing House operated at three locations in Chicago, Illinois. In February 1935, it moved along with Free Methodist Headquarters to Winona Lake, Indiana.\nDuring its history, the Free Methodist Publishing House built up a plant and accumulated property worth several hundred thousand dollars. It also contributed thousands of dollars out of its profits to other activities of the church.\nOver the years, as the ministry of the Free Methodist Church expanded, various departments of the general church gradually moved into Free Methodist Publishing House accommodations. This was provided at vast cost and without the investment of any capital by the general church.\nIn 1960, the Free Methodist Publishing House board issued a deed in favor of the general church, whereby the church became the owner of the old property, plus nearly eight acres of land. For this the general church paid nothing, but agreed to make payments of $5,000 per year over a ten-year period to the Free Methodist Publishing House.\nAudio Publications.\nIn 1944 the Free Methodist Church began a weekly radio show called The Light and Life Radio Hour which featured hymns, sermons, prayer, and scripture reading. The show ran until 1980 and featured several different hosts over the years including Dr. Leroy Lowell, Myron F. Boyd, and Robert Andrews.\nIn 2016 Josh Avery began The FMC Radio Show which was a spiritual successor to The Light and Life Radio Hour but embodied a very different focus. In a podcast format, the show is subtitled \"your officially unofficial source for all things Free Methodist\". Instead of worship and sermon, the show means to act as a uniting factor in the Free Methodist Church by informing listeners about different things that are happening in the denomination.\nMinistry.\n\"Arnold\u2019s Commentary\" was published from 1894\u20131980. In the late 1950s and early 1960s the church pioneered fully graded church school materials. In 1960 the \"Aldersgate Biblical Series\" was developed as the only inductive curriculum of its time.\nA fully equipped printing area consisting of letterpresses, offset press, cutters, folders, bindery, linotypes etc. contributed toward making the church independent of commercial printers for the production for its printing needs at that time.\nActing on the recommendation of its executive committee, the board voted in 1988 to phase out printing operations. This decision and the 1989 General Conference decision to move the Press and Headquarters from Winona Lake to Indianapolis in 1990 shifted the focus of the Press. Where formerly, the Press produced and published Sunday school curriculum, this venture is now carried on in cooperation with other holiness denominations.\nBeginning in 2008, the Wesleyan Publishing House, publishing arm of the Wesleyan Church, began serving the distribution and customer service needs of Light and Life Press.\nMission statement.\nLight &amp; Life Communications [LLCOMM], the official publishing aim of the Free Methodist Church, is a not-for-profit corporation that exists to serve in partnership with its parent body, the Free Methodist Church. Its primary purpose is to publish and distribute materials that enable the church to fulfill its stated mission. Light &amp; Life Communications also offers its services and materials to all who seek to make Christ known.\nPublications.\nFree Methodist Communications is the publishing division of the Free Methodist Church. Publications may also be printed or distributed under the name Light &amp; Life Communications.\nLight + Life Magazine is the official magazine of the Free Methodist Church - USA and is also available online. Each issue is also translated into Spanish and published concurrently as Revista Luz y Vida. Jeff Finley is the magazine's executive editor.\n\"Free Methodist World Mission People\" is a quarterly magazine about world missions offered free of charge upon request.\nFree Methodist Conversations is an online resource for discussing important values and issues."}
{"id": "11245", "revid": "26712104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11245", "title": "Fixed point", "text": "\"Fixed point\" has many meanings in science, most of them mathematical."}
{"id": "11246", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11246", "title": "John Falstaff", "text": "Sir John Falstaff is a fictional character who appears in three plays by William Shakespeare and is eulogized in a fourth. His significance as a fully developed character is primarily formed in the plays \"Henry IV, Part 1\" and \"Part 2\", where he is a companion to Prince Hal, the future King Henry V of England. A notable eulogy for Falstaff is presented in Act II, Scene III of \"Henry V\", where Falstaff does not appear as a character on stage, as enacted by Mistress Quickly in terms that some scholars have ascribed to Plato's description of the death of Socrates after drinking hemlock. By comparison, Falstaff is presented as the buffoonish suitor of two married women in \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\".\nThough primarily a comic figure, Falstaff embodies a depth common to Shakespeare's major characters. A fat, vain, and boastful knight, he spends most of his time drinking at the Boar's Head Inn with petty criminals, living on stolen or borrowed money. Falstaff leads the apparently wayward Prince Hal into trouble, and is ultimately repudiated after Hal becomes king. Falstaff has since appeared in other media, notably in operas by Giuseppe Verdi, Ralph Vaughan Williams, and Otto Nicolai, and in Orson Welles' 1966 film \"Chimes at Midnight\". The operas focus on his role in \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", while the film adapts from the Henriad and \"The Merry Wives\". Welles, who played Falstaff in his film, considered the character to be \"Shakespeare's greatest creation\".\nRole in the plays.\nFalstaff appears in three of Shakespeare's plays, \"Henry IV, Part 1\", \"Henry IV, Part 2\", and \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\". His death is mentioned in \"Henry V\" but he has no lines, nor is it directed that he appear on stage. However, many stage and film adaptations have seen it necessary to include Falstaff for the insight he provides into King Henry V's character. The most notable examples in cinema are Laurence Olivier's 1944 version and Kenneth Branagh's 1989 film, both of which draw additional material from the \"Henry IV\" plays.\nThe character is known to have been very popular with audiences at the time, and for many years afterwards. According to Leonard Digges, writing shortly after Shakespeare's death, while many plays could not get good audiences, \"let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest, you scarce shall have a room\".\n\"Henry IV, Part 1\".\nKing Henry is troubled by the behaviour of his son and heir, the Prince of Wales. Hal (the future Henry V) has forsaken the Royal Court to waste his time in taverns with low companions. This makes him an object of scorn to the nobles and calls into question his royal worthiness. Hal's chief friend and foil in living the low life is Sir John Falstaff. Fat, old, drunk, and corrupt as he is, he has a charisma and a zest for life that captivates the Prince.\nHal likes Falstaff but makes no pretense at being like him. He enjoys insulting his dissolute friend and makes sport of him by joining in Poins' plot to disguise themselves and rob and terrify Falstaff and three friends of loot they have stolen in a highway robbery, purely for the fun of watching Falstaff lie about it later, after which Hal returns the stolen money. Rather early in the play, in fact, Hal informs us that his riotous time will soon come to a close, and he will re-assume his rightful high place in affairs by showing himself worthy to his father and others through some (unspecified) noble exploits. Hal believes that this sudden change of manner will amount to a greater reward and acknowledgment of prince-ship, and in turn earn him respect from the members of the court.\nOn the way to this climax, we are treated to Falstaff, who has \"misused the King's press damnably\", not only by taking money from able-bodied men who wished to evade service but by keeping the wages of the poor souls he brought instead who were killed in battle (\"food for powder, food for powder\"). Left on his own during Hal's battle with Hotspur, Falstaff dishonourably counterfeits death to avoid attack by Douglas. After Hal leaves Hotspur's body on the field, Falstaff revives in a mock miracle. Seeing he is alone, he stabs Hotspur's corpse in the thigh and claims credit for the kill. Though Hal knows better, he allows Falstaff his disreputable tricks. Soon after being given grace by Hal, Falstaff states that he wants to amend his life and begin \"to live cleanly as a nobleman should do\".\n\"Henry IV, Part 2\".\nThe play focuses on Prince Hal's journey toward kingship, and his ultimate rejection of Falstaff. However, unlike \"Part One\", Hal's and Falstaff's stories are almost entirely separate, as the two characters meet only twice and very briefly. The tone of much of the play is elegiac, focusing on Falstaff's age and his closeness to death, which parallels that of the increasingly sick king.\nFalstaff is still drinking and engaging in petty criminality in the London underworld. He first appears, followed by a new character, a young page whom Prince Hal has assigned him as a joke. Falstaff enquires what the doctor has said about the analysis of his urine, and the page cryptically informs him that the urine is healthier than the patient. Falstaff delivers one of his most characteristic lines: \"I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men.\" Falstaff promises to outfit the page in \"vile apparel\" (ragged clothing). He then complains of his insolvency, blaming it on \"consumption of the purse.\" They go off, Falstaff vowing to find a wife \"in the stews\" (i.e., the local brothels).\nThe Lord Chief Justice enters, looking for Falstaff. Falstaff at first feigns deafness in order to avoid conversing with him, and when this tactic fails pretends to mistake him for someone else. As the Chief Justice attempts to question Falstaff about a recent robbery, Falstaff insists on turning the subject of the conversation to the nature of the illness afflicting the King. He then adopts the pretense of being a much younger man than the Chief Justice: \"You that are old consider not the capacities of us that are young.\" Finally, he asks the Chief Justice for one thousand pounds to help outfit a military expedition, but is denied.\nHe has a relationship with Doll Tearsheet, a prostitute, who gets into a fight with Ancient Pistol, Falstaff's ensign. After Falstaff ejects Pistol, Doll asks him about the Prince. Falstaff is embarrassed when his derogatory remarks are overheard by Hal, who is present disguised as a musician. Falstaff tries to talk his way out of it, but Hal is unconvinced. When news of a second rebellion arrives, Falstaff joins the army again, and goes to the country to raise forces. There he encounters an old school friend, Justice Shallow, and they reminisce about their youthful follies. Shallow brings forward potential recruits for the loyalist army: Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, Shadow and Wart, a motley collection of rustic yokels. Falstaff and his cronies accept bribes from two of them, Mouldy and Bullcalf, not to be conscripted.\nIn the final scene, Falstaff, having learned from Pistol that Hal is now King, travels to London in expectation of great rewards. But Hal rejects him, saying that he has now changed, and can no longer associate with such people. The London lowlifes, expecting a paradise of thieves under Hal's governance, are instead purged and imprisoned by the authorities.\n\"Henry V\".\nAlthough Falstaff does not appear on stage in \"Henry V\", his death is the main subject of Act 2, Scene 3, in which Mistress Quickly delivers a memorable eulogy:\n\"The Merry Wives of Windsor\".\nFalstaff arrives in Windsor very short on money. To obtain financial advantage, he decides to court two wealthy married women, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page. Falstaff decides to send the women identical love letters and asks his servants \u2013 Pistol and Nym \u2013 to deliver them to the wives. When they refuse, Falstaff sacks them, and, in revenge, the men tell Ford and Page (the husbands) of Falstaff's intentions. Page is not concerned, but the jealous Ford persuades the Host of the Garter Inn to introduce him to Falstaff as a 'Master Brook' so that he can find out Falstaff's plans.\nWhen the women receive the letters, each goes to tell the other, and they quickly find that the letters are almost identical. The \"merry wives\" are not interested in the ageing, overweight Falstaff as a suitor; however, for the sake of their own amusement and to gain revenge for his indecent assumptions towards them both, they pretend to respond to his advances.\nThis all results in great embarrassment for Falstaff. Mr. Ford poses as 'Mr. Brook' and says he is in love with Mistress Ford but cannot woo her as she is too virtuous. He offers to pay Falstaff to court her, saying that once she has lost her honour he will be able to tempt her himself. Falstaff cannot believe his luck, and tells 'Brook' he has already arranged to meet Mistress Ford while her husband is out. Falstaff leaves to keep his appointment and Ford soliloquises that he is right to suspect his wife and that the trusting Page is a fool.\nWhen Falstaff arrives to meet Mistress Ford, the merry wives trick him into hiding in a laundry basket (\"buck basket\") full of filthy, smelly clothes awaiting laundering. When the jealous Ford returns to try and catch his wife with the knight, the wives have the basket taken away and the contents (including Falstaff) dumped into the river. Although this affects Falstaff's pride, his ego is surprisingly resilient. He is convinced that the wives are just playing hard to get with him, so he continues his pursuit of sexual advancement, with its attendant capital and opportunities for blackmail.\nAgain Falstaff goes to meet the women but Mistress Page comes back and warns Mistress Ford of her husband's approach again. They try to think of ways to hide him other than the laundry basket which he refuses to get into again. They trick him again, this time into disguising himself as Mistress Ford's maid's obese aunt, known as \"the fat woman of Brentford\". Ford tries once again to catch his wife with the knight but ends up beating the \"old woman\", whom he despises, and throwing her out of his house. Black and blue, Falstaff laments his bad luck.\nEventually the wives tell their husbands about the series of jokes they have played on Falstaff, and together they devise one last trick which ends up with the Knight being humiliated in front of the whole town. They tell Falstaff to dress as \"Herne, the Hunter\" and meet them by an old oak tree in Windsor Forest (now part of Windsor Great Park). They then dress several of the local children as fairies and get them to pinch and burn Falstaff to punish him.\nThe wives meet Falstaff, and almost immediately the \"fairies\" attack. After the chaos, the characters reveal their true identities to Falstaff. Although he is embarrassed, Falstaff takes the joke surprisingly well, as he sees it was what he deserved. Ford says he must pay back the 20 pounds 'Brook' gave him and takes the Knight's horses as recompense. Eventually they all leave together and Mistress Page even invites Falstaff to come with them: \"let us every one go home, and laugh this sport o'er by a country fire; Sir John and all\".\nOrigins.\nJohn Oldcastle.\nShakespeare originally named Falstaff \"John Oldcastle\". Lord Cobham, a descendant of the historical John Oldcastle, complained, forcing Shakespeare to change the name. Shakespeare's \"Henry IV\" plays and \"Henry V\" adapted and developed the material in an earlier play called \"The Famous Victories of Henry V\", in which Sir John \"Jockey\" Oldcastle appears as a dissolute companion of the young Henry. Prince Hal refers to Falstaff as \"my old lad of the castle\" in the first act of the play; the epilogue to \"Henry IV, Part 2\", moreover, explicitly disavows any connection between Falstaff and Oldcastle: \"Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the man.\"\nThe historical Oldcastle was a Lollard who was executed for heresy and rebellion, and he was respected by many Protestants as a martyr. In addition to the anonymous \"The Famous Victories of Henry V\", in which Oldcastle is Henry V's companion, Oldcastle's history is described in Raphael Holinshed's \"Chronicles\", Shakespeare's usual source for his histories.\nCobhams.\nIt is not clear, however, if Shakespeare characterised Falstaff as he did for dramatic purposes, or because of a specific desire to satirise Oldcastle or the Cobhams. Cobham was a common butt of veiled satire in Elizabethan popular literature; he figures in Ben Jonson's \"Every Man in His Humour\" and may have been part of the reason \"The Isle of Dogs\" was suppressed. Shakespeare's desire to burlesque a hero of early English Protestantism could indicate Roman Catholic sympathies, but Henry Brooke, 11th Baron Cobham was sufficiently sympathetic to Catholicism that in 1603, he was imprisoned as part of the Main Plot to place Arbella Stuart on the English throne, so if Shakespeare wished to use Oldcastle to embarrass the Cobhams, he seems unlikely to have done so on religious grounds.\nThe Cobhams appear to have intervened while Shakespeare was in the process of writing either \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" or the second part of \"Henry IV\". The first part of \"Henry IV\" was probably written and performed in 1596, and the name Oldcastle had almost certainly been allowed by Master of the Revels Edmund Tilney. William Brooke, 10th Baron Cobham may have become aware of the offensive representation after a public performance; he may also have learned of it while it was being prepared for a court performance (Cobham was at that time Lord Chamberlain). As father-in-law to the newly widowed Robert Cecil, Cobham certainly possessed the influence at court to get his complaint heard quickly. Shakespeare may have included a sly retaliation against the complaint in his play \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" (published after the \"Henry IV\" series). In the play, the paranoid, jealous Master Ford uses the alias \"Brook\" to fool Falstaff, perhaps in reference to William Brooke. At any rate, the name is Falstaff in the \"Henry IV, Part 1\" quarto, of 1598, and the epilogue to the second part, published in 1600, contains this clarification:\nSir John Fastolf.\nThe new name \"Falstaff\" probably derived from the medieval knight Sir John Fastolf (who may also have been a Lollard). The historical John Fastolf fought at the Battle of Patay against Joan of Arc, which the English lost. Fastolf's previous actions as a soldier had earned him wide respect, but he seems to have become a scapegoat after the debacle. He was among the few English military leaders to avoid death or capture during the battle, and although there is no evidence that he acted with cowardice, he was temporarily stripped of his knighthood. Fastolf appears in \"Henry VI, Part 1\" in which he is portrayed as an abject coward. In the\" First Folio \"his name is spelled \"Falstaffe\", so Shakespeare may have directly appropriated the spelling of the name he used in the earlier play. In a further comic double meaning, the name implies impotence.\nRobert Greene.\nIt has been suggested that the dissolute writer Robert Greene may also have been an inspiration for the character of Falstaff. This theory was first proposed in 1930 and has recently been championed by Stephen Greenblatt. Notorious for a life of dissipation and debauchery somewhat similar to Falstaff, he was among the first to mention Shakespeare in his work (in \"Greene's Groats-Worth of Wit\"), suggesting to Greenblatt that the older writer may have influenced Shakespeare's characterisation.\nCultural adaptations.\nThere are several works about Falstaff, inspired by Shakespeare's plays:\nNotes and references.\nAll references to \"Henry IV, Part 1\", \"Henry IV, Part 2\", and \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", unless otherwise specified, are taken from the Folger Shakespeare Library's \"Folger Digital Editions\" texts edited by Barbara Mowat, Paul Werstine, Michael Poston, and Rebecca Niles. Under their referencing system, 3.1.55 means act 3, scene 1, line 55. Prologues, epilogues, scene directions, and other parts of the play that are not a part of character speech in a scene, are referenced using Folger Through Line Number: a separate line numbering scheme that includes every line of text in the play."}
{"id": "11247", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11247", "title": "Floorball", "text": "Floorball is a type of floor hockey with five players and a goalkeeper in each team. Men and women play indoors with sticks and a plastic ball with holes. Matches are played in three twenty-minute periods. Floorball was included in the World Games for the first time in 2017 in Wroc\u0142aw, Poland. Sweden were the first World Games gold medal winners.\nThe game was invented in Sweden in the late 1960s. The basic rules were established in 1979 when the first floorball club in the world, Sala IBK, from Sala, was founded in Sweden. Official rules for matches were first written down in 1981.\nThe sport is organized internationally by the International Floorball Federation (IFF). As of 2014, there are over 300,133 registered floorball players worldwide. Events include an annual Champions Cup, EuroFloorball Cup and EuroFloorball Challenge for club teams and the biennial World Floorball Championships with separate divisions for men and women. Norway, the Czech Republic, Finland, Sweden, and Switzerland have consistently placed 1st, 2nd, or 3rd at the World Floorball Championships. Professional club leagues include Finland's F-liiga, Sweden's Svenska Superligan, Switzerland's National League A and the Czech Republic's Superliga florbalu.\nWhile the IFF contains 74 members, floorball is most popular where it has been developed the longest, such as the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland. It is gaining popularity in Australia, New Zealand, India, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Japan, Singapore, Malaysia, the United States, and the United Kingdom.\nHistory.\nIn various forms the game has been played since the early 20th Century in Canada as a recreational sport, especially in high school gymnasiums, as a playful variant of hockey, where the sticks got their form from the hockey game bandy. Most Canadian men born in the 1950s and before could attest to this. Similarly, during the 1950s and 1960s many public school systems within Michigan incorporated floorball into their primary and secondary school gym classes. Later, Americans claimed to have invented it, and held interstate tournaments in the 1960s. The game was formally organized as an international and more organised sport in the late 1970s in Gothenburg, Sweden. The sport began as something that was played for fun as a pastime in schools. After a decade or so, floorball began showing up in Nordic countries where the former schoolyard pastime was becoming a developed sport. Formal rules soon were developed, and clubs began to form. After some time, several countries developed national associations, and the IFF was founded in 1986.\nThe game of floorball is also known by many other names, such as salibandy (in Finland), innebandy (in Sweden and Norway), and unihockey (in Switzerland and Ireland). The names \"salibandy\" and \"innebandy\" are derived from bandy; they translate to \"hall bandy\" and \"indoor bandy\" respectively. Unihockey is derived from \"universal hockey\" since it is meant to be a special and simplified hockey form.\nExpansion.\nWhen the IFF was founded in 1986, the sport was played in mostly Nordic countries, Japan, and several parts of Europe. By 1990, floorball was recognized in 7 countries, and by the time of the first European Floorball Championships in 1994, that number had risen to 14. That number included the United States, who was the first country outside Europe and Asia to recognize floorball. By the time of the first men's world championships in 1996, 20 nations played floorball, with 12 of them participating at the tournament.\nAs of 2009, the sport of floorball has been played in almost 80 countries. Of those, 58 have national floorball associations that are recognized by the IFF. With the addition of Sierra Leone, Africa's first floorball nation, the IFF has at least one national association on each continent of the world, with the exception of Antarctica.\nDevelopment.\n10 years after the IFF was founded, the first world championships were played, with a sold out final of 15,106 people at the Globen in Stockholm, Sweden. In addition to that, the world's two largest floorball leagues, Finland's Salibandyliiga and Sweden's Svenska Superligan were formed, in 1986 and 1995 respectively.\nRecognition.\nIn December 2008, the IFF and the sport of floorball received recognition from the International Olympic Committee (IOC). In July 2011, the IOC officially welcomed the IFF into its family of Recognised International Sports Federations (ARISF). This will pave the way for floorball to enter the official sport programme. The IFF hopes that this recognition will help allow floorball to become a part of the 2020 Summer Olympics.\nIn January 2009, the IFF and the sport of floorball received recognition from the Special Olympics.\nIn addition to recognition by the International Olympic Committee and Special Olympics, the IFF is also a member of the Global Association of International Sports Federations (GAISF, formerly SportAccord), and co-operates with the International University Sports Federation (FISU). Floorball is now also member of IWGA which runs the World Games and floorball will be for the first time on programme in Wroc\u0142aw 2017.\nWorld championships.\nThe world floorball championships are an annual event where teams from across the world gather to play in a tournament in order to win the world championship. As of 2011, eight Men's, eight Women's, six Men's Under-19, and four Women's Under-19 World Floorball Championships have taken place. The Czech Republic, Finland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland remain the only five countries to have ever captured a medal at a World Championship event.\nFrom 1996 to 2009, the IFF used a World Floorball Championship format where the last team in the A-Division was relegated to the B-Division, while the top team in the B-Division was promoted to the A-Division. This format caused much hardship for countries such as Australia, Canada, Slovakia, and Spain, who have all been trying to get to the B-Division from the C-Division since 2004. In 2010, the IFF adopted a FIFA-like continental qualification system, where teams must qualify to play at the world championships. Depending on the number of countries registered per continent or region, the IFF gives spots for the world championships. For example, Argentina, Brazil, Canada and the United States would need to play for one spot at the world championships in a continental qualification tournament for the Americas.\nGameplay.\nMeasurements.\nFloorball is played indoors on a rink whose size can officially vary from wide to long, and which is surrounded by high enclosed boards with rounded corners. The goals are wide and high. Their depth is and they are from the end of the nearest boards. Face-off dots are marked on the center line. Dots are also marked from both sides of the rink on the goal lines imaginary extensions. The dots don't exceed in diameter. They do not have to be dots, they can also be crosses.\nEquipment.\nTypical equipment for a floorball player consists of a stick, a pair of shorts, a shirt, socks, and indoor sport shoes. Players may wear shin guards, eye protectors and protective padding for vital areas although most do not. Protective eyewear is, in some countries, compulsory for junior players.\nA floorball stick is short compared with one for ice hockey; the maximum size for a stick is 114\u00a0cm. As a stick cannot weigh any more than 350\u00a0grams, floorball sticks are often made of carbon and composite materials. The blade of the stick can either be \"right\" or \"left\" which indicates which way stick is supposed to be held from the players point of view. A player who is right-handed will often use a \"left\" blade since this he/she will be holding the stick to left and the other way around for left-handed people.\nGoalkeepers.\nGoalkeepers wear limited protection provided by padded pants, a padded chest protector, knee pads and a helmet. Some goalkeepers like to wear gloves and/or wristbands The goalkeeper may also wear other protective equipment such as elbow pads and jock straps but bulky padding is not permitted. Goalkeepers do not use sticks and may use their hands to play the ball when they are within the goalkeeper's box. There, they are allowed to throw the ball out to their teammates provided that the ball touches the ground before the half court mark. When they are completely outside the box, goalkeepers are considered field players and are not allowed to touch the ball with their hands.\nBall.\nA floor ball weighs and its diameter is . It has 26 holes in it, each of which are in diameter. Many of these balls now are made with aerodynamic technology, where the ball has over a thousand small dimples in it that reduce air resistance. There have been several times where a ball has been recorded to have traveled at a speed of approximately .\nRules.\nEach team can field six players at a time on the court, one player being a goalkeeper. But the coach can take the goalkeeper off and switch him with a field player whenever they like. Although it usually only happens in the end to score with one more outfield player. This can make advantages for the attacking side of the team, and disadvantages when it comes to their own defense. The team is also allowed to change players any time in the game; usually, they change the whole team. Individual substitution happens sometimes, but it usually happens when a player is exhausted or is hurt.\nA floorball game is officially played over three periods lasting 20 minutes each (15 minutes for juniors). The time is stopped in the case of penalties, goals, time-outs and any situation where the ball is not considered to be in play. The signal of a timeout should be a triple sound. An intermission of 10 minutes (or maximum 15 minutes in some competitions) takes place between each period, where teams change ends and substitution areas. Each team is allowed one timeout of 30 seconds (which is often used late in matches). There are two referees to oversee the game, each with equal authority. If a game ends in a tie, teams play ten minutes extra, and the team that scores first wins. If the game is still drawn after extra-time, a penalty shootout similar to ice-hockey decides over the winner.\nChecking is prohibited in floorball. Controlled shoulder-to-shoulder contact is allowed, but ice hockey-like checking is forbidden. Pushing players without the ball or competing for a loose ball is also disallowed, and many of these infractions lead to two-minute penalties. The best comparison in terms of legal physical contact is Association football (soccer), where checking is used to improve one's positioning in relation to the ball rather than to remove an opposing player from the play. In addition to checking, players cannot lift an opponent's stick or perform any stick infractions in order to get to the ball. As well, players may not raise their stick or play the ball above their knee level, and a stick may not be placed between a player's legs. Passing the ball by foot is allowed, but only once, after that it the ball has to be touched by the stick. After stopping the ball by foot the ball has to be touched with the stick before it can be passed to a fellow player by foot (Rule change 2014). Passing by hand or head deliberately may result in a two minutes penalty for the offending player. A field player may not enter the marked goal area and playing without stick is prohibited.\nWhen a player commits a foul, or when the ball is deemed unplayable, the play is resumed from a free-hit or a face-off. A free hit involves a player from one team to start play from the place where the ball was last deemed unplayable. A comparison of this is a free kick in soccer. For many fouls, such as stick infractions, a free hit is the only discipline provided. However, at the referee's discretion, a penalty may be worth either two or five minutes. At that point, the player who committed the foul sits in the penalty area, and his team is shorthanded for the time of the penalty. If an 'extreme' foul is committed, such as physical contact or unsportsmanlike behavior, a player may receive a 10-minute penalty or even a match misconduct.\nPenalties.\nTwo-minute penalties can arise from a number of infractions and result in the offending player being sat on a penalty seat next to the scorers/timekeepers and away from the team benches. Each penalty has a specific code that is recorded on the official match record along with the time of the foul. The team of the offending player will play short-handed for the full length of the penalty. The codes are as follows;\nTwo Minute Penalties\n5 Minute Penalties\nPersonal Fouls/Penalties\nForms.\nFreebandy.\nFreebandy is a sport that developed in the 2000s from floorball fanatics who specialize in a technique called \"zorro\", which involves lifting the ball onto a stick and allowing air resistance and fast movements to keep the ball \"stuck\" to the stick. This technique is also referred to as \"airhooking\" or \"skyhooking\". In freebandy, the rules are very much the same of those of floorball, with the exception of high nets and no infractions for high sticking. As well, the sticks are slightly tweaked from those of a floorball variety to include a \"pocket\" where the ball can be placed.\nSpecial Olympics.\nFloorball at the Special Olympics is slightly modified from the \"regular\" form of floorball. Matches are played 3-on-3 with a goaltender, on a smaller court that measures long by wide. This form of floorball was developed for the intellectually disabled, and has yet to be played at the Special Olympics. Floorball was played as a demonstration sport at the 2013 Special Olympics World Winter Games, and was played as an official sport at the games in 2017.\nStreetbandy.\nA simplified less formal version of Floorball, played with smaller team numbers and shorter periods, and typically outdoors on various surfaces, including AstroTurf. In its most basic form, it is an informal pick up game amongst friends. However, a more formal version is played in Sweden, with the following structure:\nSwiss floorball.\nSwiss floorball called unihockey is a revised version of a floorball match. The match is played on a slightly smaller court and often involves only three field players playing on each side, in 3-on-3 floorball. This form of floorball is also slightly shorter, with only two periods of 15 to 20 minutes each played. In Switzerland this form of playing is called \"smallcourt\" (Kleinfeld), opposed to the usual style of playing on a bigger court, which is called \"bigcourt\" (Grossfeld).\nWheelchair floorball.\nOriginally developed for players with disabilities, wheelchair floorball is played with exactly the same rules as \"regular\" floorball. Players use the same stick and ball, and goaltenders are also allowed to play.\nThe first ever IFF-sanctioned wheelchair floorball matches were played between the men's teams of the Czech Republic and Sweden during the 2008 Men's World Floorball Championships in Prague.\nIn addition to this, there is also an electric wheelchair variation. \nCompetitions.\nIn addition to the Floorball World Championships, there are other IFF Events for club teams such as the Champions Cup which is for the national competition winners from the Top-4 ranked nations, and the EuroFloorball Cup for the national competition winners from the 5th and lower ranked nations. There are also many international floorball club competitions.\nAsia Pacific Floorball Championship.\nThe Asia Pacific Floorball Championships are played every single year in New Zealand, Australia, Singapore, or Japan. The event was created by the Singapore Floorball Association together with the cooperation of the Asia Oceania Floorball Confederation (AOFC). Members of the AOFC get together during this tournament to play for the Asia Pacific Floorball Championship every year. The most recent champions are Men's national floorball team of Australia.\nAs of 2010, the Asia Pacific Floorball Championship is also the qualifying tournament for the World Floorball Championships.\nCanada Cup.\nThe Canada Cup is an international club tournament that is held every year in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. It is the largest floorball club tournament outside of Europe, and attracts 55+ clubs from worldwide, every year. The winners of the 2015 Canada Cup floorball tournament were the Ottawa Blizzard floorball club.\nUSA Cup.\nThe USA Cup is an international club tournament that is held annually in Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, United States. It is a part of NAFC series with Canada Cup and Falls floorball classic.\nNAFC - North American Floorball Championship.\nThe NAFC - North American Floorball Championship is an international club tournament series currently including three tournaments: Canada Cup, Falls floorball classic and USA Cup. Teams must attend at least one tournament in Canada and one in the United States with a roster that is made up of at least 50% of the same players and using the same club name to be eligible.\nCzech Open.\nThe world's largest club team tournament, the Czech Open is a traditional summer tournament held in Prague, Czech Republic. It is famous not only for its on-court activities, but also for those off-court. The tournament attracts 200+ clubs every year from 20 different countries. The most recent champions of the prestigious Czech Open are Sweden's IBF Falun.\nChampions Cup.\nThe Champions Cup was played for the first time in 2011. It is now the premier IFF event for Men's and Women's Club teams. The national championship winners from the Top-4 ranked nations compete in the event.\nEuroFloorball Cup.\nThe EuroFloorball Cup (formerly European Cup) is an IFF-organised club event for both men's and women's teams. It has taken place every single year since 1993, and in 2000 it changed its format to a 2-year event (i.e. 2000\u201301). In 2008, the tournament switched back to its one-year format. In 2011 it underwent another change when the Champions Cup was introduced for the first time.\nThe EuroFloorball Cup (EFC) is now for the national competition winners from the 5th and lower ranked nations. Qualification can be made via a number of processes. Firstly, the teams from the 5th, 6th &amp; 7th ranked nations receive automatic qualification. A team nominated by the local event organiser also gets automatic qualification, and then the last two spots are determined by qualification tournaments."}
{"id": "11250", "revid": "21009996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11250", "title": "Premier League", "text": "The Premier League, often referred to outside the UK as the English Premier League, or sometimes the EPL, (legal name: The Football Association Premier League Limited) is the top level of the English football league system. Contested by 20 clubs, it operates on a system of promotion and relegation with the English Football League (EFL). Seasons run from August to May with each team playing 38 matches (playing all 19 other teams both home and away). Most games are played on Saturday and Sunday afternoons.\nThe competition was founded as the FA Premier League on 20 February 1992 following the decision of clubs in the Football League First Division to break away from the Football League, founded in 1888, and take advantage of a lucrative television rights deal. The deal was worth around \u00a31\u00a0billion a year domestically as of 2013\u201314, with Sky and BT Group securing the domestic rights to broadcast 116 and 38 games respectively. The league is a corporation in which the member clubs act as shareholders, and generates \u20ac2.2\u00a0billion per year in domestic and international television rights. Clubs were apportioned central payment revenues of \u00a32.4\u00a0billion in 2016\u201317, with a further \u00a3343\u00a0million in solidarity payments to English Football League (EFL) clubs.\nThe Premier League is the most-watched sports league in the world, broadcast in 212 territories to 643\u00a0million homes and a potential TV audience of 4.7\u00a0billion people. For the 2018\u201319 season average Premier League match attendance was at 38,181, second to the Bundesliga's 43,500, while aggregated attendance across all matches is the highest of any league at 14,508,981. Most stadium occupancies are near capacity. The Premier League ranks second in the UEFA coefficients of leagues based on performances in European competitions over the past five seasons as of 2021, only behind Spain's La Liga.\nForty-nine clubs have competed since the inception of the Premier League in 1992: forty-seven English and two Welsh clubs. Seven of them have won the title: Manchester United (13), Chelsea (5), Manchester City (4), Arsenal (3), Blackburn Rovers (1), Leicester City (1) and Liverpool (1).\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nDespite significant European success in the 1970s and early 1980s, the late 1980s marked a low point for English football. Stadiums were crumbling, supporters endured poor facilities, hooliganism was rife, and English clubs had been banned from European competition for five years following the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985. The Football League First Division, the top level of English football since 1888, was behind leagues such as Italy's Serie A and Spain's La Liga in attendances and revenues, and several top English players had moved abroad.\nBy the turn of the 1990s the downward trend was starting to reverse. At the 1990 FIFA World Cup, England reached the semi-finals; UEFA, European football's governing body, lifted the five-year ban on English clubs playing in European competitions in 1990, resulting in Manchester United lifting the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1991. The Taylor Report on stadium safety standards, which proposed expensive upgrades to create all-seater stadiums in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster, was published in January 1990.\nDuring the 1980s major English clubs had begun to transform into business ventures, applying commercial principles to club administration to maximise revenue. Martin Edwards of Manchester United, Irving Scholar of Tottenham Hotspur, and David Dein of Arsenal were among the leaders in this transformation. The commercial imperative led to the top clubs seeking to increase their power and revenue: the clubs in Division One threatened to break away from the Football League, and in so doing they managed to increase their voting power and gain a more favourable financial arrangement, taking a 50% share of all television and sponsorship income in 1986. They demanded that television companies should pay more for their coverage of football matches, and revenue from television grew in importance. The Football League received \u00a36.3\u00a0million for a two-year agreement in 1986, but by 1988, in a deal agreed with ITV, the price rose to \u00a344\u00a0million over four years with the leading clubs taking 75% of the cash. According to Scholar who was involved in the negotiations of television deals, each of the First Division clubs received only around \u00a325,000 per year from television rights before 1986, this increased to around \u00a350,000 in the 1986 negotiation, then to \u00a3600,000 in 1988. The 1988 negotiations were conducted under the threat of ten clubs leaving to form a \"super league\", but they were eventually persuaded to stay, with the top clubs taking the lion's share of the deal. The negotiations also convinced the bigger clubs that in order to receive enough votes, they needed to take the whole of First Division with them instead of a smaller \"super league\". By the beginning of the 1990s, the big clubs again considered breaking away, especially now that they had to fund the cost of stadium upgrade as proposed by the Taylor Report.\nIn 1990, the managing director of London Weekend Television (LWT), Greg Dyke, met with the representatives of the \"big five\" football clubs in England (Manchester United, Liverpool, Tottenham Hotspur, Everton and Arsenal) over a dinner. The meeting was to pave the way for a breakaway from The Football League. Dyke believed that it would be more lucrative for LWT if only the larger clubs in the country were featured on national television and wanted to establish whether the clubs would be interested in a larger share of television rights money. The five clubs agreed with the suggestion and decided to press ahead with it; however, the league would have no credibility without the backing of The Football Association, and so David Dein of Arsenal held talks to see whether the FA were receptive to the idea. The FA did not enjoy an amicable relationship with the Football League at the time and considered it as a way to weaken the Football League's position. The FA released a report in June 1991, \"Blueprint for the Future of Football\", that supported the plan for Premier League with FA the ultimate authority that would oversee the breakaway league.\nFoundation.\nAt the close of the 1990\u20131991 season, a proposal was tabled for the establishment of a new league that would bring more money into the game overall. The Founder Members Agreement, signed on 17 July 1991 by the game's top-flight clubs, established the basic principles for setting up the FA Premier League. The newly formed top division was to have commercial independence from The Football Association and the Football League, giving the FA Premier League licence to negotiate its own broadcast and sponsorship agreements. The argument given at the time was that the extra income would allow English clubs to compete with teams across Europe. Although Dyke played a significant role in the creation of the Premier League, he and ITV (of which LWT was part) lost out in the bidding for broadcast rights: BSkyB won with a bid of \u00a3304\u00a0million over five years, with the BBC awarded the highlights package broadcast on \"Match of the Day\".\nThe First Division clubs resigned en masse from the Football League in 1992, and on 27 May that year the FA Premier League was formed as a limited company, working out of an office at the Football Association's then headquarters in Lancaster Gate. The 22 inaugural members of the new Premier League were: \nThis meant a break-up of the 104-year-old Football League that had operated until then with four divisions; the Premier League would operate with a single division and the Football League with three. There was no change in competition format; the same number of teams competed in the top flight, and promotion and relegation between the Premier League and the new First Division remained the same as the old First and Second Divisions with three teams relegated from the league and three promoted.\nThe league held its first season in 1992\u201393. It was composed of 22 clubs for that season. The first Premier League goal was scored by Brian Deane of Sheffield United in a 2\u20131 win against Manchester United. \nLuton Town, Notts County, and West Ham United were the three teams relegated from the old First Division at the end of the 1991\u201392 season, and did not take part in the inaugural Premier League season.\n\"Top Four\" dominance (2000s).\nThe 2000s saw the dominance of the so-called \"Top Four\" clubs. Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United finished at the top of the table for bulk of the decade, thereby guaranteeing qualification for the UEFA Champions League. Only four other clubs managed to qualify for the competition during this period: Leeds United (1999\u20132000), Newcastle United (2001\u201302 and 2002\u201303), Everton (2004\u201305) and Tottenham Hotspur (2009\u201310) \u2013 each occupying the final Champions League spot, with the exception of Newcastle in the 2002\u201303 season, who finished third.\nFollowing the 2003\u201304 season, Arsenal acquired the nickname \"The Invincibles\" as it became the first club to complete a Premier League campaign without losing a single game, the only time this has ever happened in the Premier League.\nIn May 2008, Kevin Keegan stated that \"Top Four\" dominance threatened the division: \"This league is in danger of becoming one of the most boring but great leagues in the world.\" Premier League chief executive Richard Scudamore said in defence: \"There are a lot of different tussles that go on in the Premier League depending on whether you're at the top, in the middle or at the bottom that make it interesting.\"\nBetween 2005 and 2012 there was a Premier League representative in seven of the eight Champions League finals, with only \"Top Four\" clubs reaching that stage. Liverpool (2005), Manchester United (2008) and Chelsea (2012) won the competition during this period, with Arsenal (2006), Liverpool (2007), Chelsea (2008) and Manchester United (2009 and 2011) all losing Champions League finals. Leeds United were the only non-\"Top Four\" side to reach the semi-finals of the Champions League, in the 2000\u201301 season. There were three Premier League teams in the Champions League semi-finals in 2006-07, 2007-09, and 2008-09, a feat only ever achieved five times (along with Serie A in 2002-03 and La Liga in 1999-2000).\nAdditionally, between the 1999\u20132000 and 2009\u201310 seasons, four Premier League sides reached UEFA Cup or Europa League finals, with only Liverpool managing to win the competition in 2001. Arsenal (2000), Middlesbrough (2006) and Fulham (2010) all lost their finals.\nAlthough the group's dominance was reduced to a degree after this period with the emergence of Manchester City and Tottenham, in terms of all time Premier League points won they remain clear by some margin. As of the end of the 2018\u201319 season \u2013 the 27th season of the Premier League \u2013 Liverpool, in fourth place in the all-time points table, were over 250 points ahead of the next team, Tottenham Hotspur. They are also the only teams to maintain a winning average of over 50% throughout their entire Premier League tenures.\nEmergence of the \"Big Six\" (2010s).\nThe years following 2009 marked a shift in the structure of the \"Top Four\" with Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester City both breaking into the top four places on a regular basis, turning the \"Top Four\" into the \"Big Six\". In the 2009\u201310 season, Tottenham finished fourth and became the first team to break the top four since Everton five years prior. Criticism of the gap between an elite group of \"super clubs\" and the majority of the Premier League has continued, nevertheless, due to their increasing ability to spend more than the other Premier League clubs. Manchester City won the title in the 2011\u201312 season, becoming the first club outside the \"Big Four\" to win since Blackburn Rovers in the 1994\u201395 season. That season also saw two of the \"Big Four\" (Chelsea and Liverpool) finish outside the top four places for the first time since that season.\nWith only four UEFA Champions League qualifying places available in the league, greater competition for qualification now exists, albeit from a narrow base of six clubs. In the five seasons following the 2011\u201312 campaign, Manchester United and Liverpool both found themselves outside of the top four three times, while Chelsea finished 10th in the 2015\u201316 season. Arsenal finished 5th in 2016\u201317, ending their record run of 20 consecutive top-four finishes.\nIn the 2015\u201316 season, the top four was breached by a non-Big Six side for the first time since Everton in 2005. Leicester City were the surprise winners of the league, qualifying for the Champions League as a result.\nOff the pitch, the \"Big Six\" wield significant financial power and influence, with these clubs arguing that they should be entitled to a greater share of revenue due to the greater stature of their clubs globally and the attractive football they aim to play. Objectors argue that the egalitarian revenue structure in the Premier League helps to maintain a competitive league which is vital for its future success. The 2016\u201317 Deloitte Football Money League report showed the financial disparity between the \"Big Six\" and the rest of the division. All of the \"Big Six\" had revenues greater than \u20ac350\u00a0million, with Manchester United having the largest revenue in the league at \u20ac676.3\u00a0million. Leicester City was the closest club to the \"Big Six\" in terms of revenue, recording a figure of \u20ac271.1\u00a0million for that season \u2013 helped by participation in the Champions League. The eighth-largest revenue generator, West Ham \u2013 who did not play in European competition \u2013 had revenues of \u20ac213.3\u00a0million, nearly half of those of the club with the fifth-largest revenue, Liverpool (\u20ac424.2\u00a0million). A substantial part of the clubs' revenue by then came from television broadcast deals, with the biggest clubs each taking from around \u00a3150\u00a0million to nearly \u00a3200\u00a0million in the 2016\u201317 season from such deals. In Deloitte's 2019 report, all the \"Big Six\" were in the top ten of the world's richest clubs.\n2020s.\nFrom the 2019\u201320 season, video assistant referees were used in the league.\nProject Big Picture was announced in October 2020 that described a plan to reunite the top Premier League clubs with the English Football League, proposed by leading Premier League clubs Manchester United and Liverpool. It has been criticised by the Premier League leadership and the UK government's Department of Culture, Media and Sport.\nIn early November 2020, the Premier League \"and other sporting bodies\" were close to agreement with the government on the implementation of a \"digital health passport\", which would admit only COVID-19 vaccinated fans into stadiums. The German \"freedom pass\" and \"app-based system\" discrimination would be the ticket for clubs to re-open their premises. The Premier League \"welcomed the potential breakthrough\" as they continued to \"work closely\" with the Sports Technology and Innovation Group under Culture Secretary Oliver Dowden and Sports Minister Nigel Huddleston.\nCorporate structure.\nThe Football Association Premier League Ltd (FAPL) is operated as a corporation and is owned by the 20 member clubs. Each club is a shareholder, with one vote each on issues such as rule changes and contracts. The clubs elect a chairman, chief executive, and board of directors to oversee the daily operations of the league. The Football Association is not directly involved in the day-to-day operations of the Premier League, but has veto power as a special shareholder during the election of the chairman and chief executive and when new rules are adopted by the league.\nThe current chairman is Sir Dave Richards, who was appointed in April 1999, and the chief executive is Richard Masters who was appointed in December 2019 and succeeds Richard Scudamore, who held the post from November 1999 until his retirement in November 2019. The former chairman and chief executive, John Quinton and Peter Leaver, were forced to resign in March 1999 after awarding consultancy contracts to former Sky executives Sam Chisholm and David Chance. Rick Parry was the league's first chief executive. On 13 November 2018, Susanna Dinnage was announced as Scudamore's successor due to start in early 2019.\nThe Premier League sends representatives to UEFA's European Club Association, the number of clubs and the clubs themselves chosen according to UEFA coefficients. For the 2012\u201313 season the Premier League has 10 representatives in the Association: Arsenal, Aston Villa, Chelsea, Everton, Fulham, Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United, Newcastle United and Tottenham Hotspur. The European Club Association is responsible for electing three members to UEFA's Club Competitions Committee, which is involved in the operations of UEFA competitions such as the Champions League and UEFA Europa League.\nCompetition format.\nCompetition.\nThere are 20 clubs in the Premier League. During the course of a season (from August to May) each club plays the others twice (a double round-robin system), once at their home stadium and once at that of their opponents', for 38 games. Teams receive three points for a win and one point for a draw. No points are awarded for a loss. Teams are ranked by total points, then goal difference, and then goals scored. If still equal, teams are deemed to occupy the same position. If there is a tie for the championship, for relegation, or for qualification to other competitions, a play-off match at a neutral venue decides rank.\nPromotion and relegation.\nA system of promotion and relegation exists between the Premier League and the EFL Championship. The three lowest placed teams in the Premier League are relegated to the Championship, and the top two teams from the Championship promoted to the Premier League, with an additional team promoted after a series of play-offs involving the third, fourth, fifth and sixth placed clubs. The number of clubs was reduced from 22 to 20 in 1995, when four teams were relegated from the league and only two teams promoted. The top flight had only been expanded to 22 teams at the start of the 1991\u201392 season \u2013 the year prior to the formation of the Premier League.\nOn 8 June 2006, FIFA requested that all major European leagues, including Italy's Serie A and Spain's La Liga, be reduced to 18 teams by the start of the 2007\u201308 season. The Premier League responded by announcing their intention to resist such a reduction. Ultimately, the 2007\u201308 season kicked off again with 20 teams.\nClubs.\n49 clubs have played in the Premier League from its inception in 1992, up to and including the 2020\u201321 season.\n2020\u201321 season.\nTwenty clubs compete in the 2020-21 PL, with three promoted from the Championship:\nNon-English clubs.\nIn 2011, after Swansea City gained promotion, a Welsh club participated in the Premier League for the first time. The first Premier League match to be played outside England was Swansea City's home match at the Liberty Stadium against Wigan Athletic on 20 August 2011. The number of Welsh clubs in the Premier League increased to two in 2013\u201314, as Cardiff City gained promotion, but they were relegated after their maiden season. Cardiff were promoted again in 2017\u201318 but the number of Welsh clubs remained the same for the 2018\u201319 Premier League season, for Swansea City were relegated from the Premier League in 2017\u201318. Following Cardiff City's relegation after the 2018\u201319 season, there are currently no Welsh clubs participating in the Premier League.\nBecause they are members of the Football Association of Wales (FAW), the question of whether clubs like Swansea should represent England or Wales in European competitions has caused long-running discussions in UEFA. Swansea took one of England's three available places in the Europa League in 2013\u201314 by winning the League Cup in 2012\u201313. The right of Welsh clubs to take up such English places was in doubt until UEFA clarified the matter in March 2012, allowing them to participate.\nParticipation in the Premier League by some Scottish or Irish clubs has sometimes been discussed, but without result. The idea came closest to reality in 1998, when Wimbledon received Premier League approval to relocate to Dublin, Ireland, but the move was blocked by the Football Association of Ireland. Additionally, the media occasionally discusses the idea that Scotland's two biggest teams, Celtic and Rangers, should or will take part in the Premier League, but nothing has come of these discussions.\nInternational competitions.\nQualification for European competitions.\nQualification criteria for 2020\u201321.\nThe top four teams in the Premier League qualify for the subsequent season's UEFA Champions League group stage. The winners of the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League also qualify for the subsequent season's UEFA Champions League group stage. If this means six Premier League teams qualify, then the fourth-placed team in the Premier League instead plays in the UEFA Europa League, for any single nation is limited to a maximum of five teams.\nThe fifth-placed team in the Premier League, as well as the winner of the FA Cup, qualifies for the subsequent season's UEFA Europa League group stage, but if the winner also finished in the top five places in the Premier League or has won one of UEFA's major tournaments, then this place reverts to the team that finished sixth. The winner of the EFL Cup qualifies for the subsequent season's UEFA Europa League second qualifying round, but if the winner already qualified for a UEFA competition via their performance in another competition, then this place reverts to the team that finished sixth in the Premier League, or seventh if the FA Cup result already caused the sixth-placed team to qualify.\nThe number of places allocated to English clubs in UEFA competitions is dependent upon the position a country holds in the UEFA country coefficients, which are calculated based upon the performance of teams in UEFA competitions in the previous five years. Currently the ranking of England (and de facto the Premier League) is second, behind Spain.\nPrevious seasons.\nAn exception to the usual European qualification system happened in 2005, after Liverpool won the Champions League the year before, but did not finish in a Champions League qualification place in the Premier League that season. UEFA gave special dispensation for Liverpool to enter the Champions League, giving England five qualifiers. UEFA subsequently ruled that the defending champions qualify for the competition the following year regardless of their domestic league placing. However, for those leagues with four entrants in the Champions League, this meant that if the Champions League winner finished outside the top four in its domestic league, it would qualify at the expense of the fourth-placed team in the league. At that time, no association could have more than four entrants in the Champions League. This occurred in 2012, when Chelsea \u2013 who had won the Champions League that summer, but finished sixth in the league \u2013 qualified for the Champions League in place of Tottenham Hotspur, who went into the Europa League.\nFrom 2015\u201316, the Europa League winners qualify for the Champions League, increasing the maximum number of participants per country to five. This took effect in England in 2016\u201317, when Manchester United finished sixth in the Premier League and won the Europa League, giving England five Champions League entrants for 2017\u201318. In these instances, any Europa League berth vacated will not be handed down to the next-best Premier League finisher outside a qualifying place and so the association's Europa League entrants for the following season will be reduced. If it happens that both Champions League and Europa League winners are of the same association and both finish outside the top four, then the fourth-placed team will be transferred to the Europa League.\nPerformance in international competition.\nBetween the 1992\u201393 and the 2018\u201319 seasons, Premier League clubs won the UEFA Champions League five times (and had seven runners-up), behind Spain's La Liga with eleven wins, level with Italy's Serie A, and ahead of, among others, Germany's Bundesliga with three wins. The FIFA Club World Cup (originally called the FIFA Club World Championship) has been won twice by a Premier League club (Manchester United in 2008 and Liverpool in 2019), with two runners-up (Liverpool in 2005 and Chelsea in 2012), behind Spain's La Liga with seven wins, Brazil's Brasileir\u00e3o with four wins, and tied with Italy's Serie A with two wins.\nSponsorship.\nThe league changed its name from the \"FA Premier League\" to simply the \"Premier League\" in 2007. From 1993 to 2016, the Premier League had title sponsorship rights sold to two companies, which were Carling brewery and Barclays Bank PLC; Barclays was the most recent title sponsor, having sponsored the Premier League from 2001 until 2016 (until 2004, the title sponsorship was held through its Barclaycard brand before shifting to its main banking brand in 2004).\nBarclays' deal with the Premier League expired at the end of the 2015\u201316 season. The FA announced on 4 June 2015 that it would not pursue any further title sponsorship deals for the Premier League, arguing that they wanted to build a \"clean\" brand for the competition more in line with those of major U.S. sports leagues.\nAs well as sponsorship for the league itself, the Premier League has a number of official partners and suppliers. The official ball supplier for the league is Nike who have had the contract since the 2000\u201301 season when they took over from Mitre. Under its \"Merlin\" brand, Topps held the licence to produce collectables for the Premier League between 1994 and 2019 including stickers (for their sticker album) and trading cards. Launched in the 2007\u201308 season, Topps\u2019 Match Attax, the official Premier League trading card game, is the best selling boys collectable in the UK, and is also the biggest selling sports trading card game in the world. In October 2018, Panini were awarded the licence to produce collectables from the 2019\u201320 season. The chocolate company Cadbury has been the official snack partner of the Premier League since 2017, and sponsors the Golden Boot, Golden Glove, and Playmaker of the Season awards.\nFinances.\nThe Premier League has the highest revenue of any association football league in the world, with total club revenues of \u20ac2.48\u00a0billion in 2009\u201310. In 2013\u201314, due to improved television revenues and cost controls, the Premier League clubs collectively made a net profit in excess of \u00a378\u00a0million, exceeding all other football leagues. In 2010 the Premier League was awarded the Queen's Award for Enterprise in the International Trade category for its outstanding contribution to international trade and the value it brings to English football and the United Kingdom's broadcasting industry.\nThe Premier League is the fourth wealthiest professional sport league after the NFL, the MLB, and the NBA by revenue.\nThe Premier League includes some of the richest football clubs in the world. Deloitte's \"Football Money League\" listed seven Premier League clubs in the top 20 for the 2009\u201310 season, and all 20 clubs were in the top 40 globally by the end of the 2013\u201314 season, largely as a result of increased broadcasting revenue. From 2013, the league generates \u20ac2.2\u00a0billion per year in domestic and international television rights.\nPremier League clubs agreed in principle in December 2012, to radical new cost controls. The two proposals consist of a break-even rule and a cap on the amount clubs can increase their wage bill by each season. With the new television deals on the horizon, momentum has been growing to find ways of preventing the majority of the cash going straight to players and agents.\nCentral payments for the 2016\u201317 season amounted to \u00a32,398,515,773 across the 20 clubs, with each team receiving a flat participation fee of \u00a335,301,989 and additional payments for TV broadcasts (\u00a31,016,690 for general UK rights to match highlights, \u00a31,136,083 for each live UK broadcast of their games and \u00a339,090,596 for all overseas rights), commercial rights (a flat fee of \u00a34,759,404) and a notional measure of \"merit\" which was based upon final league position. The merit component was a nominal sum of \u00a31,941,609 multiplied by each finishing place, counted from the foot of the table (e.g., Burnley finished 16th in May 2017, five places counting upwards, and received 5 \u00d7 \u00a31,941,609 = \u00a39,708,045 merit payment).\nMedia coverage.\nUnited Kingdom and Ireland.\nTelevision has played a major role in the history of the Premier League. The League's decision to assign broadcasting rights to BSkyB in 1992 was at the time a radical decision, but one that has paid off. At the time pay television was an almost untested proposition in the UK market, as was charging fans to watch live televised football. However, a combination of Sky's strategy, the quality of Premier League football and the public's appetite for the game has seen the value of the Premier League's TV rights soar.\nThe Premier League sells its television rights on a collective basis. This is in contrast to some other European leagues, including La Liga, in which each club sells its rights individually, leading to a much higher share of the total income going to the top few clubs. The money is divided into three parts: half is divided equally between the clubs; one quarter is awarded on a merit basis based on final league position, the top club getting twenty times as much as the bottom club, and equal steps all the way down the table; the final quarter is paid out as facilities fees for games that are shown on television, with the top clubs generally receiving the largest shares of this. The income from overseas rights is divided equally between the twenty clubs.\nNot all Premier League matches are televised in the United Kingdom, as the league upholds the long-standing prohibition on telecasts of any association football match (domestic or otherwise) that kicks off between 2:45\u00a0p.m. and 5:15\u00a0p.m. on Saturday matchdays.\nThe first Sky television rights agreement was worth \u00a3304\u00a0million over five seasons. The next contract, negotiated to start from the 1997\u201398 season, rose to \u00a3670\u00a0million over four seasons. The third contract was a \u00a31.024\u00a0billion deal with BSkyB for the three seasons from 2001 to 2002 to 2003\u201304. The league brought in \u00a3320\u00a0million from the sale of its international rights for the three-year period from 2004 to 2005 to 2006\u201307. It sold the rights itself on a territory-by-territory basis. Sky's monopoly was broken from August 2006 when Setanta Sports was awarded rights to show two out of the six packages of matches available. This occurred following an insistence by the European Commission that exclusive rights should not be sold to one television company. Sky and Setanta paid \u00a31.7\u00a0billion, a two-thirds increase which took many commentators by surprise as it had been widely assumed that the value of the rights had levelled off following many years of rapid growth. Setanta also hold rights to a live 3\u00a0pm match solely for Irish viewers. The BBC has retained the rights to show highlights for the same three seasons (on \"Match of the Day\") for \u00a3171.6\u00a0million, a 63\u00a0per\u00a0cent increase on the \u00a3105\u00a0million it paid for the previous three-year period. Sky and BT have agreed to jointly pay \u00a384.3\u00a0million for delayed television rights to 242 games (that is the right to broadcast them in full on television and over the internet) in most cases for a period of 50 hours after 10\u00a0pm on matchday. Overseas television rights fetched \u00a3625\u00a0million, nearly double the previous contract. The total raised from these deals is more than \u00a32.7\u00a0billion, giving Premier League clubs an average media income from league games of around \u00a340\u00a0million-a-year from 2007 to 2010.\nThe TV rights agreement between the Premier League and Sky has faced accusations of being a cartel, and a number of court cases have arisen as a result. An investigation by the Office of Fair Trading in 2002 found BSkyB to be dominant within the pay TV sports market, but concluded that there were insufficient grounds for the claim that BSkyB had abused its dominant position. In July 1999 the Premier League's method of selling rights collectively for all member clubs was investigated by the UK Restrictive Practices Court, which concluded that the agreement was not contrary to the public interest.\nThe BBC's highlights package on Saturday and Sunday nights, as well as other evenings when fixtures justify, will run until 2016. Television rights alone for the period 2010 to 2013 have been purchased for \u00a31.782\u00a0billion. On 22 June 2009, due to troubles encountered by Setanta Sports after it failed to meet a final deadline over a \u00a330\u00a0million payment to the Premier League, ESPN was awarded two packages of UK rights containing 46 matches that were available for the 2009\u201310 season as well as a package of 23 matches per season from 2010 to 2011 to 2012\u201313. On 13 June 2012, the Premier League announced that BT had been awarded 38 games a season for the 2013\u201314, 2014\u201315 and 2015\u201316 seasons at \u00a3246\u00a0million-a-year. The remaining 116 games were retained by Sky, which paid \u00a3760\u00a0million-a-year. The total domestic rights have raised \u00a33.018\u00a0billion, an increase of 70.2% over the 2010\u201311 to 2012\u201313 rights. The value of the licensing deal rose by another 70.2% in 2015, when Sky and BT paid \u00a35.136\u00a0billion to renew their contracts with the Premier League for another three years up to the 2018\u201319 season.\nA new rights cycle began in the 2019\u201320 season, with the domestic package increasing to 200 matches overall; in February 2018, BT were awarded the package of 32 lunchtime fixtures on Saturdays, while Sky was awarded four of the seven packages, covering the majority of weekend fixtures (including eight new prime time fixtures on Saturdays), as well as Monday and Friday matches. Two remaining packages of 20 fixtures each were to be sold at a later date, including three rounds of mid-week fixtures and a bank holiday round. As Sky already owned the maximum number of matches it could hold without breaching a 148-match cap, it was speculated that at least one of the new packages could go to a new entrant, such as a streaming service. The five packages sold to BT and Sky were valued at \u00a34.464\u00a0billion. In June 2018, it was announced that Amazon Prime Video and BT had acquired the remaining two packages; Amazon acquired rights to 20 matches per-season, covering a mid-week round in December, and all Boxing Day fixtures. The Amazon telecasts are produced in association with Sunset + Vine and BT Sport.\nWith the resumption of play in the 2019\u201320 Premier League due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, the Premier League announced that all remaining matches would be carried on British television, split primarily across Sky, BT, and Amazon. A large number of these matches were also scheduled for free-to-air broadcasts, with Sky airing 25 on Pick, Amazon streaming its four matches on Twitch, and the BBC \u2014 for the first time in league history \u2014 carrying four live matches.\nAs matches would continue to be played without spectators upon the start of the 2020\u201321 Premier League, its clubs voted on September 8 to continue broadcasting all matches through at least September (with the BBC and Amazon each holding one additional match), and \"appropriate arrangements\" being made for October. It was later announced that matches not selected for broadcast would be carried on pay-per-view via BT Sport Box Office and Sky Box Office at a cost of \u00a314.95 per-match. The PPV scheme was poorly-received; the Football Supporters' Federation felt that the price was too high, and there were concerns that it could encourage piracy. There were calls from supporters to boycott the pay-per-views, and make donations to support charitable causes instead (with Newcastle's \"Charity Not PPV\" campaign raising \u00a320,000 for a local food bank, and Arsenal fans raising \u00a334,000 for Islington Giving). On 13 November, amid the reintroduction of measures across the UK, the Premier League officially announced that the non-televised matches would be assigned to its main broadcast partners, and again including additional matches for the BBC and Amazon.\nUK highlights\nIn August 2016, it was announced the BBC would be creating a new magazine-style show for the Premier League entitled \"The Premier League Show\".\nWorldwide.\nThe Premier League is the most-watched football league in the world, broadcast in 212 territories to 643\u00a0million homes and a potential TV audience of 4.7\u00a0billion people. The Premier League's production arm, Premier League Productions, is operated by IMG Productions and produces all content for its international television partners.\nThe Premier League is particularly popular in Asia, where it is the most widely distributed sports programme. In Australia, Optus telecommunications holds exclusive rights to the Premier League, providing live broadcasts and online access (Fox Sports formerly held rights). In India, the matches are broadcast live on STAR Sports. In China, the broadcast rights were awarded to Super Sports in a six-year agreement that began in the 2013\u201314 season. As of the 2019\u201320 season, Canadian broadcast rights to the Premier League are owned by DAZN, after having been jointly owned by Sportsnet and TSN from 2013\u201314.\nThe Premier League is broadcast in the United States by NBC Sports, a division of Sky parent Comcast. Premier League viewership has increased rapidly, with NBC and NBCSN averaging a record 479,000 viewers in the 2014\u201315 season, up 118% from 2012\u201313 when coverage still aired on Fox Soccer and ESPN/ESPN2 (220,000 viewers), and NBC Sports has been widely praised for its coverage. NBC Sports reached a six-year extension with the Premier League in 2015 to broadcast the league until the end of the 2021\u201322 season in a deal valued at $1\u00a0billion (\u00a3640\u00a0million).\nBetween the 1998\u201399 season and the 2012\u201313 season, RT\u00c9 broadcast highlights on \"Premier Soccer Saturday\" and occasionally \"Premier Soccer Sunday\". Between the 2004\u201305 season and the 2006\u201307 season, RT\u00c9 broadcast a live match on 15 Saturday afternoons with each match being called \"Premiership Live\".\nThe Premier League is broadcast by SuperSport across sub-Saharan Africa.\nWidening gap with lower leagues.\nThere has been an increasing gulf between the Premier League and the Football League. Since its split with the Football League, many established clubs in the Premier League have managed to distance themselves from their counterparts in lower leagues. Owing in large part to the disparity in revenue from television rights between the leagues, many newly promoted teams have found it difficult to avoid relegation in their first season in the Premier League. In every season except 2001\u201302, 2011\u201312 and 2017\u201318, at least one Premier League newcomer has been relegated back to the Football League. In 1997\u201398, all three promoted clubs were relegated at the end of the season.\nThe Premier League distributes a portion of its television revenue to clubs that are relegated from the league in the form of \"parachute payments\". Starting with the 2013\u201314 season, these payments are in excess of \u00a360\u00a0million over four seasons. Though designed to help teams adjust to the loss of television revenues (the average Premier League team receives \u00a341\u00a0million while the average Football League Championship club receives \u00a32\u00a0million), critics maintain that the payments actually widen the gap between teams that have reached the Premier League and those that have not, leading to the common occurrence of teams \"bouncing back\" soon after their relegation. For some clubs who have failed to win immediate promotion back to the Premier League, financial problems, including in some cases administration or even liquidation have followed. Further relegations down the footballing ladder have ensued for several clubs unable to cope with the gap.\nStadiums.\nAs of the 2017\u201318 season, Premier League football has been played in 58 stadiums since the formation of the division. The Hillsborough disaster in 1989 and the subsequent Taylor Report saw a recommendation that standing terraces should be abolished. As a result, all stadiums in the Premier League are all-seater. Since the formation of the Premier League, football grounds in England have seen constant improvements to capacity and facilities, with some clubs moving to new-build stadiums. Nine stadiums that have seen Premier League football have now been demolished. The stadiums for the 2017\u201318 season show a large disparity in capacity. For example, Wembley Stadium, the temporary home of Tottenham Hotspur, has a capacity of 90,000 while Dean Court, the home of Bournemouth, has a capacity of 11,360. The combined total capacity of the Premier League in the 2017\u201318 season is 806,033 with an average capacity of 40,302.\nStadium attendances are a significant source of regular income for Premier League clubs. For the 2016\u201317 season, average attendances across the league clubs were 35,838 for Premier League matches with an aggregate attendance of 13,618,596. This represents an increase of 14,712 from the average attendance of 21,126 recorded in the Premier League's first season (1992\u201393). However, during the 1992\u201393 season, the capacities of most stadiums were reduced as clubs replaced terraces with seats in order to meet the Taylor Report's 1994\u201395 deadline for all-seater stadiums. The Premier League's record average attendance of 36,144 was set during the 2007\u201308 season. This record was then beaten in the 2013\u201314 season recording an average attendance of 36,695 with an attendance of just under 14\u00a0million, the highest average in England's top flight since 1950.\nManagers.\nManagers in the Premier League are involved in the day-to-day running of the team, including the training, team selection and player acquisition. Their influence varies from club-to-club and is related to the ownership of the club and the relationship of the manager with fans. Managers are required to have a UEFA Pro Licence which is the final coaching qualification available, and follows the completion of the UEFA 'B' and 'A' Licences. The UEFA Pro Licence is required by every person who wishes to manage a club in the Premier League on a permanent basis (\"i.e.\", more than 12 weeks, the amount of time an unqualified caretaker manager is allowed to take control). Caretaker appointments are managers that fill the gap between a managerial departure and a new appointment. Several caretaker managers have gone on to secure a permanent managerial post after performing well as a caretaker, including Paul Hart at Portsmouth and David Pleat at Tottenham Hotspur.\nArs\u00e8ne Wenger is the longest-serving manager, having been in charge of Arsenal in the Premier League from 1996 to his departure at the conclusion of the 2017\u201318 season, and holds the record for most matches managed in the Premier League with 828, all with Arsenal. He broke the record set by Alex Ferguson, who had managed 810 matches with Manchester United from the Premier League's inception to his retirement at the end of the 2012\u201313 season. Ferguson was in charge of Manchester United from November 1986 until his retirement at the end of the 2012\u201313 season, meaning he was manager for the last five years of the old Football League First Division and all of the first 21 seasons of the Premier League.\nThere have been several studies into the reasoning behind, and effects of, managerial sackings. Most famously, Professor Sue Bridgewater of the University of Liverpool and Dr. Bas ter Weel of the University of Amsterdam, performed two separate studies which helped to explain the statistics behind managerial sackings. Bridgewater's study found clubs generally sack their managers upon dropping below an average of one point per match.\nPlayers.\nTransfer regulations and Foreign Players.\nPlayer transfers may only take place within transfer windows set by the Football Association. The two transfer windows run from the last day of the season to 31 August and from 31 December to 31 January. Player registrations cannot be exchanged outside these windows except under specific licence from the FA, usually on an emergency basis. As of the 2010\u201311 season, the Premier League introduced new rules mandating that each club must register a maximum 25-man squad of players aged over 21, with the squad list only allowed to be changed in transfer windows or in exceptional circumstances. This was to enable the \"home grown\" rule to be enacted, whereby the Premier League would also from 2010 require at least eight members of the named 25-man squad to be \"home-grown players\".\nAt the inception of the Premier League in 1992\u201393, just 11 players named in the starting line-ups for the first round of matches hailed from outside of the United Kingdom or Ireland. By 2000\u201301, the number of foreign players participating in the Premier League was 36% of the total. In the 2004\u201305 season, the figure had increased to 45%. On 26 December 1999, Chelsea became the first Premier League side to field an entirely foreign starting line-up, and on 14 February 2005, Arsenal were the first to name a completely foreign 16-man squad for a match. By 2009, under 40% of the players in the Premier League were English. By February 2020, 117 different nationalities had played in the Premier League, and 101 nationalities had scored in the competition.\nIn 1999, in response to concerns that clubs were increasingly passing over young English players in favour of foreign players, the Home Office tightened its rules for granting work permits to players from countries outside of the European Union. A non-EU player applying for the permit must have played for his country in at least 75\u00a0per\u00a0cent of its competitive 'A' team matches for which he was available for selection during the previous two years, and his country must have averaged at least 70th place in the official FIFA world rankings over the previous two years. If a player does not meet those criteria, the club wishing to sign him may appeal.\nTop scorers.\nThe Premier League Golden Boot is awarded each season to the top scorer in the division. Former Blackburn Rovers and Newcastle United striker Alan Shearer holds the record for most Premier League goals with 260. Twenty-eight players have reached the 100-goal mark. Since the first Premier League season in 1992\u201393, 23 players from 11 clubs have won or shared the top scorer title. Thierry Henry won his fourth overall scoring title by scoring 27 goals in the 2005\u201306 season. Andrew Cole and Alan Shearer hold the record for most goals in a season (34) \u2013 for Newcastle and Blackburn respectively. Ryan Giggs of Manchester United holds the record for scoring goals in consecutive seasons, having scored in the first 21 seasons of the league. Giggs also holds the record for the most Premier League assists, with 162.\nWages.\nThere is no team or individual salary cap in the Premier League. As a result of the increasingly lucrative television deals, player wages rose sharply following the formation of the Premier League when the average player wage was \u00a375,000 per year. In the 2018\u201319 season the average annual salary stood at \u00a32.99\u00a0million.\nThe total salary bill for the 20 Premier League clubs in the 2018\u201319 season was \u00a31.62bn; this compares to \u00a31.05bn in La Liga, \u00a30.83bn in Serie A, \u00a30.72bn in Bundesliga, and \u00a30.54bn in Ligue 1. The club with the highest average wages is Manchester United at \u00a36.5m. This is smaller than the club with the highest wage bill in Spain (Barcelona \u00a310.5m), and Italy (Juventus \u00a36.7m), but higher than in Germany (Bayern Munich \u00a36.4m), and France (Paris St Germain 6.1m). For the 2018-19 season the ratio of the wages of the highest-paid team to lowest-paid in the Premier League is 6.82 to 1. This is much lower than in La Liga (19.1 to 1), Serie A (16 to 1), Bundesliga (20.5 to 1), and Ligue 1 (26.6 to 1). Because of the lower differential between team wage bills in the Premier League, it is often regarded as being more competitive than other top European leagues.\nPlayer transfer fees.\nThe record transfer fee for a Premier League player has risen steadily over the lifetime of the competition. Prior to the start of the first Premier League season Alan Shearer became the first British player to command a transfer fee of more than \u00a33\u00a0million. The record has increased steadily and Philippe Coutinho is now the most expensive transfer involving a Premier League club at \u00a3106\u00a0million. The highest transfer fee paid by a Premier League club is \u00a389\u00a0million for Paul Pogba.\nAwards.\nTrophy.\nThe Premier League maintains two trophies \u2013 the genuine trophy (held by the reigning champions) and a spare replica. Two trophies are held for the purpose of making the award within minutes of the title being secured, in the event that on the final day of the season two clubs are still within reach of winning the League. In the rare event that more than two clubs are vying for the title on the final day of the season, a replica won by a previous club is used.\nThe current Premier League trophy was created by Royal Jewellers Asprey of London. It consists of a trophy with a golden crown and a malachite plinth base. The plinth weighs and the trophy weighs . The trophy and plinth are tall, wide and deep.\nIts main body is solid sterling silver and silver gilt, while its plinth is made of malachite, a semi-precious stone. The plinth has a silver band around its circumference, upon which the names of the title-winning clubs are listed. Malachite's green colour is also representative of the green field of play. The design of the trophy is based on the heraldry of Three Lions that is associated with English football. Two of the lions are found above the handles on either side of the trophy \u2013 the third is symbolised by the captain of the title-winning team as he raises the trophy, and its gold crown, above his head at the end of the season. The ribbons that drape the handles are presented in the team colours of the league champions that year. In 2004, a special gold version of the trophy was commissioned to commemorate Arsenal winning the title without a single defeat.\nPlayer and manager awards.\nIn addition to the winner's trophy and the individual winner's medals awarded to players who win the title, the Premier League also issues other awards throughout the season.\nA man-of-the-match award is awarded to the player who has the greatest impact in an individual match.\nMonthly awards are also given for the Manager of the Month, Player of the Month and Goal of the Month. These are also issued annually for Manager of the Season, Player of the Season. and Goal of the Season. The Young Player of the Season award is given to the most outstanding U-23 player starting from the 2019\u201320 season.\nThe Golden Boot award is given to the top goalscorer of every season, the Playmaker of the Season award is given to the player who makes the most assists of every season, and the Golden Glove award is given to the goalkeeper with the most clean sheets at the end of the season.\nFrom the 2017\u201318 season, players also receive a milestone award for 100 appearances and every century there after and also players who score 50 goals and multiples thereof. Each player to reach these milestones is to receive a presentation box from the Premier League containing a special medallion and a plaque commemorating their achievement.\n20 Seasons Awards.\nIn 2012, the Premier League celebrated its second decade by holding the 20 Seasons Awards:"}
{"id": "11252", "revid": "31613059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11252", "title": "Fine Gael", "text": "Fine Gael (, ; English: \"Family (or Tribe) of the Irish\"), officially Fine Gael (United Ireland), is a liberal-conservative and Christian-democratic political party in the Republic of Ireland. Fine Gael is currently the third-largest party in the Republic of Ireland in terms of members of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann and largest in terms of Irish members of the European Parliament. The party had a membership of 30,000 in 2020. Leo Varadkar succeeded Enda Kenny as party leader on 2 June 2017 and as Taoiseach on 14 June; Kenny had been leader since 2002, and Taoiseach since 2011.\nFine Gael was founded on 8 September 1933 following the merger of its parent party Cumann na nGaedheal, the National Centre Party and the Army Comrades Association. Its origins lie in the struggle for Irish independence and the pro-Treaty side in the Irish Civil War and Michael Collins, in particular, is linked to the party. In its early years, the party was commonly known as \"Fine Gael\u2013The United Ireland Party\", abbreviated \"UIP\".\nFine Gael is generally considered to be more of a proponent of market liberalism than its traditional rival, Fianna F\u00e1il. Fine Gael describes itself as a \"party of the progressive centre\" which it defines as acting \"in a way that is right for Ireland, regardless of dogma or ideology\". It lists its core values as \"equality of opportunity, free enterprise and reward, security, integrity and hope.\" In international politics, the party is highly supportive of the European Union, along with generally supporting strengthened relations with the United Kingdom and opposition to physical force Irish republicanism. The party's autonomous youth wing, Young Fine Gael (YFG), was formed in 1977.\nHaving governed in coalition with the Labour Party between 2011 and 2016, and in a minority government along with Independent TDs from 2016 to 2020, Fine Gael currently forms part of an historic coalition government with its traditional rival, Fianna F\u00e1il, and the Green Party, with Leo Varadkar serving as T\u00e1naiste.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nFine Gael was created in 1933 following the merger of 3 political organisations; Cumann na nGaedhael led by W. T. Cosgrave, the National Centre Party led by Frank MacDermot and James Dillon, and the National Guard (better known as the Blueshirts), led by Eoin O'Duffy. Cumann na nGaedhael, born out of the pro-Anglo-Irish Treaty side in the Irish Civil War, has been the party of government from the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922 until the 1932 general election, where it was forced out by the newly emergent Fianna F\u00e1il. The National Center Party was a newly created party that had done well at the '32 election representing the interests of Irish farmers. The National Guard were not a political party, but a militant group made up of former pro-treaty soldiers first known as the Army Comrades Association. Following the disruption of Cumann na nGaedhael meetings by members of the Irish Republican Army, the ACA had begun providing security at their events. This led to the leadership of the ACA being taken over by a number of CnaG Teachtai Dala including Thomas F. O'Higgins. In early 1933 Eoin O'Duffy took over the ACA, renamed them the National Guard and began instilling on the organisation elements of European Fascism. However, by August 1933 the Fianna F\u00e1il government had banned the National Guard fearing a planned parade in Dublin could be an attempt to emulate the March on Rome.\nIt was following this, in September 1933, that the three groups combine forces and merged to form Fine Gael. The National Guard (referred informally by this point as \"the Blueshirts\") were to serve as the young wing of the new party as \"The League of Youth\". In order to not appear as a simple continuation of Cumann na nGaedhael, Eoin O'Duffy was made leader of the new party. However, following poor results at the 1934 Irish local elections and increasingly rabid rhetoric, O'Duffy was removed from the leadership and replaced by WT Cosgrove, with James Dillon made deputy leader. O'Duffy attempted to regain control of the Blueshirts, but was rebuffed by the majority of the members who choose to stay with Fine Gael. Under the stewardship of Cosgrove and Dillon, the party returned to the more traditional conservatism espoused by Cumann na nGaedhael, with the moribund League of Youth disbanded by 1936.\nFinding success with coalitions with Labour.\nFine Gael remained out of government and at a low ebb for a prolonged period until the aftermath of the 1948 general election, which saw the party form a grand coalition with several other parties in order to oust Fianna F\u00e1il and place Fine Gael member John A. Costello as Taoiseach. The coalition was short-lived but revived again between 1954 and 1957. However, following this stint Fine Gael were once again sent into the political wilderness. It was not until leader Liam Cosgrave secured an election pact with the Labour Party that the government returned to power in 1973. It was during this period where Fine Gael campaigned in a number of referendums: the party supported Irish entry into the European Communities, supported dropped the voting age from 21 to 18, and supported a proposal to remove the \"special position\" of the Roman Catholic Church from the constitution. It was successful in all three of these campaigns. The arrangement between Fine Gael and Labour proved pleasing to both parties and the pact remained throughout the rest of the 1970s and into the 1980s, seeing the pair enter government a number of times together. This period also saw Fine Gael becoming increasingly liberal in ethos, particularly under the leadership of Garret FitzGerald. In 1986 the party campaigned for a yes in that year's referendum on legalising divorce, but the No side won by a margin of 0.5%.\nDecline and rebuilding.\nThe 1980s had proven fruitful electorally for Fine Gael, but the 1990s and early 2000s saw this momentum decline quickly. One of the first signs of this was the party's poor result in the 1990 Irish presidential election, in which their candidate Austin Currie only secured 17% of the initial vote. Although the party was able to form the government between 1994 and 1997 thanks to coalition partners the Labour Party and the Democratic Left, as well as legalise divorce in 1995 after a successful referendum, the party's share of TDs fell from 54 in 1997 to only 31 in the 2002 general election, its second-worst result ever at that point. It was at this point Enda Kenny took over leadership of the party and began the process of rebuilding it. At the 2007 general election Kenny was able to bring Fine Gael back to its 1997 levels with 51 TDs.\nRecovery.\nThe collapse of the Celtic Tiger resulted in the post-2008 Irish economic downturn, which threw Ireland not only into economic turmoil but also political upheaval. The 2011 Irish general election saw the governing Fianna F\u00e1il collapse at the polls, while Fine Gael and the Labour Party returned with their best results ever. For the first time in its history, Fine Gael became the largest party in D\u00e1il Eireann. Once more Fine Gael and Labour paired up to form a government, their tenure marked by the difficulty of trying to guide Ireland towards economic recovery. In 2013, a number of Fine Gael parliamentary party members, including Lucinda Creighton, were expelled from the party for defing the party whip on anti-abortion grounds to oppose the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Bill. These members subsequently formed a political party called Renua.\nRecent history.\nIn 2015, the Fine Gael/Labour government held a a referendum on the legislation of gay marriage in Ireland. The government campaigned for a yes vote and were successful. Following the 2016 general election, Fine Gael retained control of the government as a minority government, made possible by a confidence and supply agreement with Fianna F\u00e1\u00edl, who agreed to abstain in confidence votes. Enda Kenny resigned as party leader in 2017, and following a leadership contest, Leo Varadkar became his successor as well as Taoiseach. In doing so, Varadkar became one of the first openly LGBT heads of government in the world. In 2018 the Fine Gael government held a referendum on the Eighth Amendment, the provision in the Irish constitution which forbid abortion. The party campaigned to repeal the amendment and were successful.\nAfter the 2020 general election, for the first time in history, Fine Gael entered into a coalition government with its traditional rival Fianna F\u00e1il, as well as the Green Party, with Leo Varadkar serving as T\u00e1naiste.\nIdeology and policies.\nAs a political party of the centre-right, Fine Gael has been described as liberal-conservative, Christian-democratic, liberal, conservative, and pro-European, with an ideological base combining elements of cultural conservatism and economic liberalism.\nSocial policies.\nFine Gael adopted the 'Just Society' policy statement in the 1960s, based on principles of social justice and equality. It was created by the emerging social democratic wing of the party, led by Declan Costello. The ideas expressed in the policy statement had a significant influence on the party in the years to come.\nWhile Fine Gael was traditionally socially conservative for most of the twentieth century due to the conservative Christian ethos of Irish society during this time, its members are variously influenced by social liberalism, social democracy and Christian democracy on issues of social policy. Under Garret FitzGerald, the party's more socially liberal, or pluralist, wing gained prominence. Proposals to allow divorce were put by referendum by two Fine Gael\u2013led governments, in 1986 under FitzGerald, and in 1995 under John Bruton, passing very narrowly on this second attempt.\nLGBT+ issues.\nFine Gael supported civil unions for same-sex couples from 2003, voting for the Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Bill 2010, and the party approved a motion at its 2012 Ardfheis to prioritise the consideration of same-sex marriage in the upcoming constitutional convention. In 2013 party leader and Taoiseach Enda Kenny declared his support for same-sex marriage. The Fine Gael-led government held a referendum on the subject on 22 May 2015. The referendum passed, with the electorate voting to extend full marriage rights to same-sex couples, with 62.1% in favour and 37.9% opposed. The party has run advertisements in GCN (Gay Community News) advertising its commitments to same-sex couples.\nIn 2015, months before the marriage equality referendum, Leo Varadkar became the first Irish government minister to come out as gay. In May 2019, former Rose of Tralee Maria Walsh, was elected as a Fine Gael MEP for the Midlands-Northwest constituency in the 2019 European Parliament election, running alongside Mair\u00e9ad McGuinness MEP. Walsh was Fine Gael's first openly lesbian candidate.\nFine Gael has an LGBT+ section, Fine Gael LGBT, and in 2017, Leo Varadkar became the first Taoiseach to march in Dublin's Pride Parade.\nAbortion.\nIn 1983, having initially supported the proposal, Fine Gael came out in opposition to the Eighth Amendment to the Irish Constitution that was being submitted in a referendum in 1983, which sought to introduce a constitutional prohibition on abortion. Under then leader and Taoiseach Garret FitzGerald it campaigned for a 'No' vote, arguing, on the advice of the Attorney General Peter Sutherland, that the wording, which had been drafted under the previous government, when analysed was ambiguous and open to many interpretations. This referendum resulted in the Eighth Amendment to the Irish constitution, giving the unborn child a qualified equal right to life to that of the mother. Its stance conflicted with that of the Pro-Life Amendment Campaign (PLAC) and Catholic bishops, and Fianna F\u00e1il, the largest party in the State at the time, but then in opposition.\nThe party also campaigned against the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the Constitution in 2002, which proposed to remove suicide as a grounds for granting a termination of a pregnancy. Suicide had been ruled as a ground, under the 8th amendment, in the X Case judgement of the Irish Supreme Court. The amendment was rejected by Irish voters.\nIn 2013 it proposed, and supported, the enactment of the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013, which implemented in statute law the \"X case\" ruling of the Irish Supreme Court, granting access to a termination of a pregnancy where there is a real and substantial risk to the life, not the health, of the mother, including a threat of suicide. Five TDs &amp; two Senators, including Minister of State Lucinda Creighton, lost the Fine Gael party whip for voting against the legislation. Creighton later left Fine Gael to found Renua The Act was criticised by various pro-life groups and Catholic bishops, but supported by a majority of the electorate in opinion polls, with many indicating they wished to see a more liberal law on abortion.\nEnda Kenny's Fine Gael\u2013led minority government took office after the 2016 election with a programme which promised a randomly selected Citizens' Assembly to report on possible changes to the Eighth Amendment, which would be considered by an Oireachtas committee, to whose report the government would respond officially in debates in both houses of the Oireachtas. Fine Gael Oireachtas members were promised a free vote on the issue. Leo Varadkar succeeded Enda Kenny as Taoiseach on 14 June 2017 and promised to hold a referendum on abortion in 2018. Several Fine Gael TDs, notably Health Minister Simon Harris and Kate O'Connell, were prominent supporters of the pro-choice side before and during the referendum. While the party was divided, the majority of Fine Gael TDs and Senators, as well as most members, were in favour of repealing the Eighth Amendment. A referendum to repeal the Eighth Amendment was held on 25 May 2018 and was passed by 66.4% of voters.\nDrug policies.\nThe party have traditionally held a strong stance against the decriminalisation of drugs. In 2007, Fine Gael's leader at the time Enda Kenny called for drug and alcohol testing to be performed in schools, saying cocaine usage was \"rampant\" in schools in some areas.\nAt the party's Ard Fheis in 2014, a proposed motion to support the legalisation of cannabis was voted down by the membership.\nIn 2016, the Fine Gael health minister James Reilly said that they would not be changing their policy on the legalisation of cannabis, due to \"serious concerns about the health impacts\" of cannabis.\nLaw and order party.\nAlthough Ireland's political spectrum was traditionally divided along Civil War lines, rather than the traditional European left\u2013right spectrum, Fine Gael is described generally as a centre-right party, with a focus on law and order, enterprise and reward, and \"fiscal rectitude\". As the descendant of the pro-Treaty factions in the Irish Civil War, Fine Gael takes inspiration from Michael Collins and claims his legacy. He remains a symbol for the party, and the anniversary of his death is commemorated each year in August.\nEconomic policies.\nFine Gael has, since its inception, portrayed itself as a party of fiscal rectitude and minimal government interference in economics, advocating pro-enterprise policies. In that they followed the line of the previous pro-Treaty government that believed in minimal state intervention, low taxes and social expenditures. Newly elected politicians for the party in the D\u00e1il have strongly advocated liberal economic policies. Lucinda Creighton (who has since left the party) and Leo Varadkar in particular have been seen as strong advocates of a neoliberal approach to Ireland's economic woes and unemployment problems. Varadkar in particular has been a strong proponent of small, indigenous business, advocating that smaller firms should benefit from the government's recapitalisation program. Its former finance spokesman Richard Bruton's proposals have been seen as approaching problems from a pro-enterprise point of view. Its fairer budget website in 2011 suggested that its solutions are \"tough but fair\". Other solutions conform generally to conservative governments' policies throughout Europe, focusing on cutting numbers in the public sector, while maintaining investment in infrastructure.\nFine Gael's proposals have sometimes been criticised mostly by smaller political groupings in Ireland, and by some of the trade unions, who have raised the idea that the party's solutions are more conscious of business interests than the interests of the worker. The SIPTU trade union has stated its opposition to the Taoiseach Enda Kenny's assertion, in response to Ireland's economic crisis, that the national wage agreement should be suspended. Kenny's comments had support however and the party attributes its significant rise in polls in 2008 to this.\nFine Gael's Simon Coveney launched what the party termed a radical re-organisation of the Irish semi-state company sector. Styled the New Economy and Recovery Authority (or NewERA), Coveney said that it is an economic stimulus plan that will \"reshape the Irish economy for the challenges of the 21st century\". Requiring an \u20ac18.2 billion investment in Energy, Communications and Water infrastructure over a four-year period, it was promoted as a way to enhance energy security and digital reputation of Ireland. A very broad ranging document, it proposed the combined management of a portfolio of semi-state assets, and the sale of all other, non-essential services. The release of equity through the sale of the various state resources, including electricity generation services belonging to the ESB, Bord na M\u00f3na and Bord G\u00e1is, in combination with use of money in the National Pensions Reserve Fund, was Fine Gael's proposed funding source for its national stimulus package.\nThe plan was seen at being the basis of a Fine Gael program for government. Seen as being the longer term contribution to Fine Gael's economic plan, it has been publicised in combination with a more short term policy proposal from Leo Varadkar. This document, termed \"Hope for a Lost Generation\", promises to bring 30,000 young Irish people off the Live Register in a year by combining a National Internship Program, a Second Chance Education Scheme, an Apprenticeship Guarantee and Community Work Program, as well as instituting a German style, Workshare program.\nConstitutional reform policies.\nFine Gael is seen as being a constitutional party, with members and public representatives always showing considerable deference to the institutional organs of the Irish state. The party leadership has been eager to be seen to engage in an ongoing constitutional debate in Ireland on the topic of political reform. The debate which has been monitored by the \"Irish Times\" in its Renewing the Republic opinion pieces, has largely centred on the make up of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament. Fine Gael's Phil Hogan TD, now a European Commissioner, has published the party's proposals for political and constitutional reform. In a policy document entitled \"New Politics\", Hogan suggested creating a country with \"a smaller, more dynamic and more responsive political system,\" reducing the size of the D\u00e1il by 20, changing the way the D\u00e1il works, and in a controversial move, abolishing the Irish senate, Seanad \u00c9ireann.\nAiming to carry out the parties proposals through a series of constitutional referendums, the proposals were echoed by then Labour leader Eamon Gilmore, when he proposed his own constitutional \"crusade\" at his 2010 party conference, shortly after.\nHealth policies.\nThe Irish health system, being administered centrally by the Health Service Executive, is seen to be poor by comparison to other countries in Europe, ranking outside expected levels at 25th according to the Euro Health Consumer Index 2006.\nFine Gael has long wanted Ireland to break with the system of private health insurance, public medical cards and what it calls the two tiers of the health system and has launched a campaign to see the system reformed. Speaking in favour of the campaign, Fine Gael then health spokesman James Reilly stated \"Over the last 10\u00a0years the health service has become a shambles. We regularly have over 350 people on trolleys in A&amp;E, waiting lists that go on for months, outpatient waiting lists that go on for years and cancelled operations across the country...\"\nFine Gael launched its FairCare campaign and website in April 2009, which stated that the health service would be reformed away from a costly ineffective endeavour, into a publicly regulated system where compulsory universal health insurance would replace the existing provisions.\nThis strategy was criticised by Fianna F\u00e1il's then-Minister for Children, Barry Andrews. The spokesperson for family law and children, Alan Shatter TD, robustly defended its proposals as the only means of reducing public expenditure, and providing a service in Ireland more akin to the Canadian, German, Dutch and Austrian health systems.\nFine Gael's current healthcare policy revolves around the implementation of Sl\u00e1intecare, a cross-party plan for the reform of the Irish health system. Sl\u00e1intecare is focused on introducing \"a universal single-tiered health service, which guarantees access based on need, not income\u2026 through Universal Health Insurance\".\nPro-Europeanism.\nFine Gael is among the most pro-European integration parties in Ireland, having supported the European Constitution, the Lisbon Treaty, and advocating participation in European common defence. Under Enda Kenny, the party questioned Irish neutrality, with Kenny claiming that \"the truth is, Ireland is not neutral. We are merely unaligned.\" The party's youth wing, Young Fine Gael, passed a motion in 2016 calling on the government to apply for membership of NATO.\nSince Brexit, Fine Gael has taken a strong pro-European stance, stating that Ireland's place is \"at the heart of Europe\". In government, the party has launched the \"Global Ireland\" plan to develop alliances with other small countries across Europe and the world.\nEuropean affiliations.\nFine Gael is a founding member of the European People's Party (EPP), the largest European political party comprising liberal conservative and Christian democratic national-level parties from across Europe. Fine Gael's MEPs sit with the EPP Group in the European Parliament, and Fine Gael parliamentarians also sit with the EPP Groups in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and Committee of the Regions. Young Fine Gael is a member of the Youth of the European People's Party (YEPP).\nIt is inferred from the party's relationship with its European counterparts via membership of the European People's Party that Fine Gael belongs on the centre-right. The party conforms generally with European political parties that identify themselves as being Christian democratic.\nElectoral performance.\nAt the 2011 general election, Fine Gael gained 25 seats bringing them to a total of 76. The party ran candidates in all 43 constituencies, and had candidates elected in every constituency except Dublin North-West.\nFine Gael won 19 seats in Seanad \u00c9ireann following the 2011 election, a gain of four from the previous election in 2007.\nAt the 2009 Local elections held on 5 June 2009, Fine Gael won 556 seats, surpassing Fianna F\u00e1il which won 407 seats, and making Fine Gael the largest party of local government nationally. They gained 88 seats from their 2004 result.\nAt 2009 European Parliament election held on the same day as the Local elections, which saw a reduction in the number seats from 13 to 12 for Ireland, the party won four seats, retaining the largest number of seats of an Irish party in the European Parliament. This was a loss of one seat from its 2004 result.\nWhile Fine Gael was responsible for the initial nomination of the uncontested, first President of Ireland, Douglas Hyde, a Fine Gael candidate has never won an election to the office of president. The most recent Fine Gael presidential candidate, Gay Mitchell, finished fourth in the 2011 presidential election, with 6.4% of the vote. In 2004, Fine Gael supported the re-election of President Mary McAleese. Similarly, it supported the re-election of Michael D. Higgins in the 2018 presidential election.\nIn the 2016 general election the outgoing government consisting of Fine Gael and its partner the Labour Party was defeated. The previous government had the largest majority in the history of the state with a combined 113 seats out of the 166-seat D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The aftermath of the general election resulted in months of negotiations for an agreement of government. A deal was reached with the main opposition and traditional rival Fianna F\u00e1il to facilitate a minority Fine Gael-led government. Fine Gael governed Ireland alone with eight Independent members of the D\u00e1il until 2020, when the party emerged as the third party following the general election. After governing for several months in a caretaker capacity, Fine Gael agreed to serve in a historic coalition government along with its traditional rival, Fianna F\u00e1il, and the Green Party, with Fianna F\u00e1il leader Miche\u00e1l Martin serving as Taoiseach and Leo Varadkar serving as T\u00e1naiste. Under the agreed Programme for Government, the role of Taoiseach will rotate to Leo Varadkar in 2022.\nPlanning and payment tribunals.\nThe Moriarty Tribunal has sat since 1997 and has investigated the granting of a mobile phone license to Esat Telecom by Michael Lowry when he was Fine Gael Minister for Transport, Energy and Communications in the Rainbow Coalition of the mid-1990s. Lowry resigned from the Cabinet after it was revealed at the Moriarty Tribunal that businessman Ben Dunne had paid for an IR\u00a3395,000 extension to Lowry's County Tipperary home. Lowry, now an independent TD, supported the Fianna F\u00e1il\u2013Green Party government in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann until March 2011.\nIt was also revealed in December 1996 that Fine Gael had received some \u00a3180,000 from Ben Dunne in the period 1987 to 1993. This was composed of \u00a3100,000 in 1993, \u00a350,000 in 1992 and \u00a330,000 in 1989. In addition, Michael Noonan received \u00a33,000 in 1992 towards his election campaign, Ivan Yates received \u00a35,000, Michael Lowry received \u00a35,000 and Sean Barrett received \u00a31,000 in the earlier 1987 election. John Bruton said he had received \u00a31,000 from Dunne in 1982 towards his election campaign, and Dunne had also given \u00a315,000 to the Labour Party during the 1990 Presidential election campaign.\nFollowing revelations at the Moriarty Tribunal on 16 February 1999, in relation to Charles Haughey and his relationship with AIB, former Taoiseach Garret Fitzgerald confirmed that AIB and Ansbacher wrote off debts of almost \u00a3200,000 that he owed in 1993, when he was in financial difficulties because of the collapse of the aircraft leasing company, GPA, in which he was a shareholder. The write-off occurred after Dr Fitzgerald left politics and Dr. Fitzgerald also said he believed his then Fine Gael colleague, Peter Sutherland, who was chairman of AIB at the time, was unaware of the situation.\nLeadership.\nThe current leader of the Fine Gael party is Leo Varadkar, who, as well as being Ireland's youngest ever Taoiseach is the country's first openly gay leader. The position of deputy leader has been held since 2017 by Simon Coveney TD, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade.\nParty leader.\nThe following are the terms of office as party leader and as Taoiseach (bolded) if applicable:\nYoung Fine Gael.\nYoung Fine Gael (YFG) is the autonomous youth movement of Fine Gael. It was founded in 1976 by the then leader Garret FitzGerald. It caters for young people under 35 with an interest in Fine Gael and politics, in cities, towns and third level colleges throughout Ireland. YFG is led by its national executive consisting of ten members elected on a regional basis, and on a national panel."}
{"id": "11253", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11253", "title": "Fu Manchu", "text": "Dr Fu Manchu is a fictional villain who was introduced in a series of novels by the English author Sax Rohmer during the first half of the 20th century. The character was also extensively featured in cinema, television, radio, comic strips and comic books for over 90 years and he has also become an archetype of the evil criminal genius and mad scientist, while lending his name to the Fu Manchu mustache.\nBackground.\nAccording to his own account, Sax Rohmer decided to start the Dr Fu Manchu series after his Ouija board spelled out C-H-I-N-A-M-A-N when he asked what would make his fortune. \nRohmer wrote 14 novels concerning the villain. The image of Orientals invading Western nations became the foundation of Rohmer's commercial success, being able to sell 20 million copies in his lifetime.\nCharacters.\nDr Fu Manchu.\nSupervillain Dr Fu Manchu's murderous plots are marked by the extensive use of arcane methods; he disdains guns or explosives, preferring dacoits, Thugs and members of other secret societies as his agents (usually armed with knives) or using \"pythons and cobras\u00a0... fungi and my tiny allies, the bacilli\u00a0... my black spiders\" and other peculiar animals or natural chemical weapons. He has a great respect for the truth (in fact, his word is his bond), and uses torture and other gruesome tactics to dispose of his enemies.\nDr Fu Manchu is described as a mysterious villain because he seldom appears on the scene. He always sends his minions to commit crimes for him. In the novel \"The Insidious Dr Fu-Manchu\", he sends a beautiful young girl to the crime scene to see that the victim is dead. He also sends a dacoit to attack Sir Denis Nayland Smith and Dr Petrie.\nIn the novel \"Fu Manchu's Bride\" (1933), Dr Fu Manchu claims to hold doctorates from four western universities, while in \"Emperor Fu Manchu\" (1959), he states that he attended Heidelberg University, the Sorbonne and the University of Edinburgh (in the film \"The Mask of Fu Manchu\", however, he states proudly that \"I am a doctor of philosophy from Edinburgh, a doctor of law from Christ's College, a doctor of medicine from Harvard. My friends, out of courtesy, call me 'Doctor.). At the time of their first encounter (1911) Dr Petrie believed that Dr Fu Manchu was more than 70 years old. That would mean that he studied for his first doctorate in the 1860s or 1870s.\nAccording to Cay Van Ash, Rohmer's biographer and former assistant who became the first author to continue the series after Rohmer's death, \"Fu Manchu\" was a title of honor, which meant \"the warlike Manchu\". Van Ash speculates that Dr Fu Manchu was a member of the imperial family of China who backed the losing side in the Boxer Rebellion. In the early books (1913\u20131917) Dr Fu Manchu is an agent of the Chinese tong known as the Si-Fan and acts as the mastermind behind a wave of assassinations targeting western imperialists. In the later books (1931\u20131959) he has gained control of the Si-Fan, which has been changed from a mere Chinese tong into an international criminal organization under his leadership. In addition to attempting to take over the world and restore China to its ancient glory (Dr Fu Manchu's main goals right from the beginning), the Si-Fan now also tries to rout fascist dictators and halt the spread of worldwide Communism for its leader's own selfish reasons. Dr Fu Manchu knows that both Fascism and Communism present major obstacles to his plans for world domination. The Si-Fan is largely funded through criminal activities, particularly the drug trade and human trafficking (or \"white slavery\"). Dr Fu Manchu has extended his already considerable lifespan by use of the elixir of life, a formula that he has spent decades trying to perfect.\nSir Denis Nayland Smith and Dr Petrie.\nOpposing Dr Fu Manchu in the stories are Sir Denis Nayland Smith and, in the first three books, Dr Petrie. Petrie narrates the first three novels (the later novels are narrated by various other characters allied with Smith right up to the end of the series). Smith carries on the fight, combating Dr Fu Manchu more by sheer luck and dogged determination than intellectual brilliance except \"in extremis\". Smith and Dr Fu Manchu share a grudging respect for one another, as each believes that a man must keep his word, even to an enemy.\nIn the first three books Smith is a colonial police commissioner in Burma granted a roving commission, which allows him to exercise authority over any group that can help him in his mission. He resembles Sherlock Holmes in his physical appearance and his acerbic manner, but not in deductive genius. He has been criticized as racist and jingoistic, especially in the early books in the series, and he gives voice to anti-Asian sentiments. When Rohmer revived the series in 1931 Smith, who has been knighted for his efforts to defeat Dr Fu Manchu, is an ex-Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard. He later accepts a position with the British Secret Service. Several books have him placed on special assignment with the FBI.\nActors who have played Dr Fu Manchu:\nActors who have played Sir Denis Nayland Smith:\nActors who have played Dr Petrie:\nK\u00e2raman\u00e8h.\nProminent among Dr Fu Manchu's agents is the \"seductively lovely\" K\u00e2raman\u00e8h. Her real name is unknown. She was sold to the Si-Fan by Egyptian slave traders while she was still a child. K\u00e2raman\u00e8h falls in love with Dr Petrie, the narrator of the first three books in the series, and rescues Petrie and Nayland Smith many times. Eventually the couple are united and she wins her freedom. They marry and have a daughter, Fleurette, who figures in two later novels, \"Fu Manchu's Bride\" (1933) and its sequel, \"The Trail of Fu Manchu\" (1934). Lin Carter later created a son for Dr Petrie and K\u00e2raman\u00e8h.\nFah Lo Suee.\nDr Fu Manchu's daughter, Fah Lo Suee, is a devious mastermind in her own right, frequently plotting to usurp her father's position in the Si-Fan and aiding his enemies both within and outside the organization. Her real name is unknown; Fah Lo Suee was a childhood term of endearment. She is introduced anonymously while still a teenager in the third book in the series and plays a larger role in several of the titles of the 1930s and 1940s. She is known for a time as Koreani after being brainwashed by her father, but her memory is later restored. Like her father, she takes on false identities, among them Madame Ingomar, Queen Mamaloi and Mrs van Roorden. In films she has been portrayed by numerous actresses over the years. Her character is usually renamed in film adaptations because of difficulties with the pronunciation of her name. Anna May Wong played Ling Moy in \"Daughter of the Dragon\" (1931). Myrna Loy portrayed the similarly named Fah Lo See in \"The Mask of Fu Manchu\" (1932). Gloria Franklin had the role of Fah Lo Suee in \"Drums of Fu Manchu\" (1940). Laurette Luez played Karamaneh in \"The Adventures of Dr. Fu Manchu\" (1956), but the character owed more to Fah Lo Suee than to Rohmer's depiction of K\u00e2raman\u00e8h. Tsai Chin portrayed Dr Fu Manchu's daughter Lin Tang in the five Christopher Lee films of the 1960s.\nControversy.\nThe stories of Dr Fu Manchu, both in print and on screen, have sparked numerous accusations of racism and \"Orientalism\", from his fiendish design to his Chinese name. After the release of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's film adaptation of \"The Mask of Fu Manchu\" (1932), which featured the Chinese villain telling his followers that they must \"kill the white man and take his women\", the Chinese Embassy in Washington, DC, issued a formal complaint against the film.\nFollowing the release of Republic Pictures' serial adaptation of \"Drums of Fu Manchu\" (1940) the United States Department of State requested that the studio make no further films about the character, as China was an ally against Japan during World War II. Likewise, Rohmer's publisher, Doubleday, refused to publish additions to the best-selling series for the duration of World War II once the United States entered the conflict. BBC Radio and Broadway investors subsequently rejected Rohmer's proposals for an original Fu Manchu radio serial and stage show during the 1940s.\nThe re-release of \"The Mask of Fu Manchu\" in 1972 was met with protests from the Japanese American Citizens League, which stated that \"the movie was offensive and demeaning to Asian Americans\". CBS Television decided to cancel a showing of \"The Vengeance of Fu Manchu\". Los Angeles TV station KTLA shared similar sentiments, but ultimately decided to run \"The Brides of Fu Manchu\" with the disclaimer: \"This feature is presented as fictional entertainment and is not intended to reflect adversely on any race, creed or national origin.\"\nRohmer responded to charges that his work demonized Asians in \"Master of Villainy\", an autobiography co-written by his wife:\nIt was Rohmer's contention that he based Dr Fu Manchu and other \"Yellow Peril\" mysteries on real Chinese criminals he met as a newspaper reporter covering Limehouse.\nIn May 2013 General Motors cancelled an advertisement after complaints that a phrase it contained, \"the land of Fu Manchu\", which was intended to refer to China, was offensive.\nCharacterizing Dr Fu Manchu as an overtly racist creation has been criticized in the book \"Lord of Strange Deaths: The Fiendish World of Sax Rohmer\". In a review of the book in \"The Independent\" Dr Fu Manchu is contextualised: \"These magnificently absurd books, glowing with a crazed exoticism, are really far less polar, less black and white, less white and yellow, than they first seem.\"\nCultural impact.\nThe style of facial hair associated with Fu Manchu in film adaptations has become known as the Fu Manchu mustache. The \"Fu Manchu\" mustache is defined in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as a \"long, narrow moustache whose ends taper and droop down to the chin\", although Rohmer's writings described the character as wearing no such adornment.\nBefore the creation of Dr Fu Manchu Chinese people were often portrayed in Western culture as victims. Dr Fu Manchu indicated a new phase in which Chinese people were portrayed as perpetrators of crime and threats to western culture.\nThe character of Dr Fu Manchu became, for some, a stereotype embodying the \"Yellow Peril\". For others Fu Manchu became the most notorious personification of western views of the Chinese, and became the model for other villains in contemporary \"Yellow Peril\" thrillers: these villains often had characteristics consistent with xenophobia towards East Asian people during the period of Western colonialism.\nAfter World War II the stereotype inspired by Dr Fu Manchu increasingly became a subject of satire. Fred Fu Manchu, a \"famous Chinese bamboo saxophonist\", was a recurring character on \"The Goon Show\", a 1950s British radio comedy programme. He was featured in the episode \"The Terrible Revenge of Fred Fu Manchu\" in 1955 (announced as \"Fred Fu Manchu and his Bamboo Saxophone\"), and made minor appearances in other episodes (including \"China Story\", \"The Siege of Fort Night\", and in \"The Lost Emperor\" as \"Doctor Fred Fu Manchu, Oriental tattooist\"). The character was created and performed by Spike Milligan, who used it to mock British xenophobia and self-satisfaction, the traits that summoned the original Fu Manchu into existence, and not as a slur against Asians. The character was further parodied in a later radio comedy, \"Round the Horne\", as Dr Chu En Ginsberg MA (failed), portrayed by Kenneth Williams.\nIn 1977 Trebor produced a sweet called \"Fu Munchews\".\nDr Fu Manchu was parodied as Dr Wu in the action-comedy film \"Black Dynamite\" (2009), in which the executor of an evil plan against African Americans is an insidious, mustache-sporting kung fu master.\nBooks.\nThe following Fu Manchu titles have been republished by Titan Books\nDr Fu Manchu also makes appearances in the following non-Fu Manchu works:\nIn other media.\nFilm.\nDr Fu Manchu first appeared on the big screen in the British silent film series \"The Mystery of Dr Fu Manchu\" (1923) starring Harry Agar Lyons, a series of 15 short feature films, each running around 20 minutes. Lyons returned to the role in \"The Further Mysteries of Dr Fu Manchu\" (1924), which comprised eight additional short feature films.\nDr Fu Manchu made his American film debut in Paramount Pictures' early talkie \"The Mysterious Dr. Fu Manchu\" (1929) starring Warner Oland, soon to be known for his portrayal of Charlie Chan. Oland repeated the role in \"The Return of Dr. Fu Manchu\" (1930) and \"Daughter of the Dragon\" (1931) as well as in the short film \"Murder Will Out\" (part of the omnibus film \"Paramount on Parade\") in which Dr. Fu Manchu confronts both Philo Vance and Sherlock Holmes.\nThe most controversial incarnation of the character was MGM's \"The Mask of Fu Manchu\" (1932) starring Boris Karloff and Myrna Loy. At the time of its first release the film was considered racist and offensive by representatives of the Chinese government. The film was suppressed for many years, but has been released on DVD uncut.\nDr Fu Manchu returned to the serial format in Republic Pictures' \"Drums of Fu Manchu\" (1940), a 15-episode serial considered to be one of the best the studio ever made. It was later edited and released as a feature film in 1943.\nOther than an obscure, unauthorized Spanish spoof \"El Otro Fu Manchu\" (1946), the Devil Doctor was absent from the big screen for 25 years, until producer Harry Alan Towers began a series starring Christopher Lee in 1965. Towers and Lee made five Fu Manchu films: \"The Face of Fu Manchu\" (1965), \"The Brides of Fu Manchu\" (1966), \"The Vengeance of Fu Manchu\" (1967), \"The Blood of Fu Manchu\" (1968), and \"The Castle of Fu Manchu\" (1969).\nThe character's last authorised film appearance was in the Peter Sellers spoof \"The Fiendish Plot of Dr. Fu Manchu\" (1980), with Sellers featured as both Dr Fu Manchu and Nayland Smith. The film bore little resemblance to any earlier film or the original books. Fu Manchu claims he was known as \"Fred\" at public school, a reference to the character in \"The Terrible Revenge of Fred Fu Manchu\", a 1955 episode of \"The Goon Show\" which had co-starred Sellers.\nJes\u00fas Franco, who directed \"The Blood of Fu Manchu\" and \"The Castle of Fu Manchu\", also directed \"The Girl from Rio\", the second of three Harry Alan Towers films based on Rohmer's Fu Manchu-like female character Sumuru. He later directed an unauthorized 1986 Spanish film featuring Dr Fu Manchu's daughter, \"Esclavas del Crimen\".\nIn the film \"Grindhouse\" (2007), Nicolas Cage makes an uncredited comedic cameo appearance as Dr Fu Manchu during the \"trailer\" for the fake film \"Werewolf Women of the SS\", directed by Rob Zombie.\nA composite character of Fu Manchu and the Mandarin, based on the former character's depiction in \"Secret Wars\" in the identity of the latter, will appear in the upcoming film \"Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings\", portrayed by Tony Leung Chiu-wai. The character was previously referenced in the \"Iron Man\" trilogy and \"All Hail the King\".\nTelevision.\nA half-hour pilot was produced in 1952 for NBC's consideration starring Cedric Hardwicke as Sir Denis Nayland Smith, John Carradine as Dr. Fu Manchu, and Reed Hadley as Dr. John Petrie. NBC turned it down without broadcasting it, but it has been screened at special events.\nThe television arm of Republic Pictures produced a 13-episode syndicated series, \"The Adventures of Dr. Fu Manchu\" (1956), starring Glen Gordon as Dr. Fu Manchu, Lester Matthews as Sir Denis Nayland Smith, and Clark Howat as Dr. John Petrie. The title sequence depicted Smith and Dr. Fu Manchu in a game of chess as the announcer stated that \"the devil is said to play for men's souls. So does Dr. Fu Manchu, evil incarnate.\" At the conclusion of each episode, after Nayland Smith and Petrie had foiled Dr. Fu Manchu's latest fiendish scheme, Dr. Fu Manchu would be seen breaking a black chess piece in a fit of frustration (black king's bishop, always the same scene, repeated) just before the closing credits rolled. It was directed by Franklin Adreon, as well as William Witney. Dr. Fu Manchu was never allowed to succeed in this TV series. Unlike the Holmes/Watson type relationship of the films, the series featured Smith as a law enforcement officer and Petrie as a staff member for the Surgeon-General.\nRadio.\nDr. Fu Manchu's earliest radio appearances were on \"The Collier Hour\" 1927\u20131931 on the Blue Network. This was a radio program designed to promote \"Collier's\" magazine and presented weekly dramatizations of the current issue's stories and serials. Dr. Fu Manchu was voiced by Arthur Hughes. A self-titled show on CBS followed in 1932\u201333. John C. Daly, and later Harold Huber, played Dr. Fu Manchu.\nIn 2010, Fu Manchu's connections with the University of Edinburgh where he supposedly obtained a doctorate were investigated in a mockumentary by Miles Jupp for BBC Radio 4.\nAdditionally, there were \"pirate\" broadcasts from the continent into Britain, from Radio Luxembourg and Radio Lyons in 1936 through 1937. Frank Cochrane voiced Dr. Fu Manchu. The BBC produced a competing series, \"The Peculiar Case of the Poppy Club\", starting in 1939. That same year, \"The Shadow of Fu Manchu\" aired in the United States as a thrice-weekly serial dramatizing the first nine novels.\nComic strips.\nDr. Fu Manchu was first brought to newspaper comic strips in a black and white daily comic strip drawn by Leo O'Mealia (1884\u20131960) that ran from 1931 to 1933. The strips were adaptations of the first two Dr. Fu Manchu novels and part of the third. Unlike most other illustrators, O'Mealia drew Dr. Fu Manchu as a clean-shaven man with an abnormally large cranium. The strips were copyrighted by \"Sax Rohmer and The Bell Syndicate, Inc.\" Two of the Dr. Fu Manchu comic strip storylines were reprinted in the 1989 book \"Fu Manchu: Two Complete Adventures\".\nBetween 1962 and 1973, the French newspaper \"Le Parisien Lib\u00e9r\u00e9\" published a comic strip by Juliette Benzoni (script) and Robert Bressy (art)."}
{"id": "11254", "revid": "32000187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11254", "title": "Friesland", "text": "Friesland ( , , ; official , ), historically known as Frisia, is a province of the Netherlands located in the northern part of the country. It is situated west of Groningen, northwest of Drenthe and Overijssel, north of Flevoland, northeast of North Holland, and south of the Wadden Sea. As of January 2020, the province had a population of 649,944 and a total area of .\nThe capital and seat of the provincial government is the city of Leeuwarden (West Frisian: \"Ljouwert\"), a city with 123,107 inhabitants. Other large municipalities in Friesland are Sneek (pop. 33,512), Heerenveen (pop. 50,257) and Drachten (pop. 55,938). Since 2017, Arno Brok is the King's Commissioner in the province. A coalition of the Christian Democratic Appeal, the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, the Labour Party and the Frisian National Party forms the executive branch. The province is divided into 18 municipalities. The area of the province was once part of the ancient, larger region of Frisia. The official languages of Friesland are West Frisian and Dutch.\nToponymy.\nIn 1996 the Provincial Council of Friesland resolved that the official name of the province should follow the West Frisian spelling rather than the Dutch spelling, resulting in \"Friesland\" being replaced by \"Frysl\u00e2n\". In 2004 the Dutch government confirmed this resolution, putting in place a three-year scheme to oversee the name change and associated cultural programme.\nThe province of Friesland is occasionally referred to as \"Frisia\" by, amongst others, Hanno Brand, head of the history and literature department at the Fryske Akademy since 2009. However, the English-language webpage of the Friesland Provincial Council refers to the province as \"Frysl\u00e2n\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe Frisii were among the migrating Germanic tribes that, following the breakup of Celtic Europe in the 4th century BC, settled along the North Sea. They came to control the area from roughly present-day Bremen to Bruges, and conquered many of the smaller offshore islands. What little is known of the Frisii is provided by a few Roman accounts, most of them military. Pliny the Elder said their lands were forest-covered with tall trees growing up to the edge of the lakes. They lived by agriculture and raising cattle.\nIn his \"Germania\", Tacitus would describe all the Germanic peoples of the region as having elected kings with limited powers and influential military leaders who led by example rather than by authority. The people lived in spread-out settlements. He specifically noted the weakness of Germanic political hierarchies in reference to the Frisii, when he mentioned the names of two kings of the 1st century Frisii and added that they were kings \"as far as the Germans are under kings\".\nIn the 1st century BC, the Frisii halted a Roman advance and thus managed to maintain their independence. Some or all of the Frisii may have joined into the Frankish and Saxon peoples in late Roman times, but they would retain a separate identity in Roman eyes until at least 296, when they were forcibly resettled as \"laeti\" (Roman-era serfs) and thereafter disappear from recorded history. Their tentative existence in the 4th century is confirmed by archaeological discovery of a type of earthenware unique to 4th-century Frisia, called \"terp Tritzum\", showing that an unknown number of Frisii were resettled in Flanders and Kent, likely as \"laeti\" under the aforementioned Roman coercion. The lands of the Frisii were largely abandoned by c. 400 as a result of the conflicts of the Migration Period, climate deterioration, and the flooding caused by a rise in the sea level.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nThe area lay empty for one or two centuries, when changing environmental and political conditions made the region habitable again. At that time, during the Migration Period, \"new\" Frisians (probably descended from a merging of Angles, Saxons, Jutes and Frisii) repopulated the coastal regions. These Frisians consisted of tribes with loose bonds, centred on war bands but without great power. The earliest Frisian records name four social classes, the (\"nobiles\" in Latin documents; \"adel\" in Dutch and German) and (\"vrijen\" in Dutch and \"Freien\" in German), who together made up the \"Free Frisians\" who might bring suit at court, and the \"laten\" or \"liten\" with the slaves, who were absorbed into the \"laten\" during the Early Middle Ages, as slavery was not so much formally abolished, as evaporated. The \"laten\" were tenants of lands they did not own and might be tied to it in the manner of serfs, but in later times might buy their freedom.\nUnder the rule of King Aldgisl, the Frisians came in conflict with the Frankish mayor of the palace Ebroin, over the old Roman border fortifications. Aldgisl could keep the Franks at a distance with his army. During the reign of Redbad, however, the tide turned in favour of the Franks; in 690, the Franks were victorious in the Battle of Dorestad. In 733, Charles Martel sent an army against the Frisians. The Frisian army was pushed back to Eastergoa. The next year the Battle of the Boarn took place. Charles ferried an army across the Almere with a fleet that enabled him to sail up to De Boarn. The Frisians were defeated in the ensuing battle, and their last king Poppo was killed. The victors began plundering and burning heathen sanctuaries. Charles Martel returned with much loot, and broke the power of the Frisian kings for good. The Franks annexed the Frisian lands between the Vlie and the Lauwers. They conquered the area east of the Lauwers in 785, when Charlemagne defeated Widukind. The Carolingians laid Frisia under the rule of \"grewan\", a title that has been loosely related to count in its early sense of \"governor\" rather than \"feudal overlord\". About 100,000 Dutch drowned in a flood in 1228.\nFrisian freedom.\nWhen, around 800, the Scandinavian Vikings first attacked Frisia, which was still under Carolingian rule, the Frisians were released from military service on foreign territory in order to be able to defend themselves against the heathen Vikings. With their victory in the Battle of Norditi in 884 they were able to drive the Vikings permanently out of East Frisia, although it remained under constant threat. Over the centuries, whilst feudal lords reigned in the rest of Europe, no aristocratic structures emerged in Frisia. This 'Frisian freedom' was represented abroad by \"redjeven\" who were elected from among the wealthier farmers or from elected representatives of the autonomous rural municipalities. Originally the \"redjeven\" were all judges, so-called \"Asega\", who were appointed by the territorial lords.\nAfter significant territories were lost to Holland in the Friso-Hollandic Wars, Frisia saw an economic downturn in the mid-14th century. Accompanied by a decline in monasteries and other communal institutions, social discord led to the emergence of untitled nobles called \"haadlingen\" (\"headmen\"), wealthy landowners possessing large tracts of land and fortified homes who took over the role of the judiciary as well offering protection to their local inhabitants. Internal struggles between regional leaders resulted in bloody conflicts and the alignment of regions along two opposing parties: the Fetkeapers and Skieringers. On 21 March 1498, a small group of Skieringers from Westergo secretly met with Albert III, Duke of Saxony, the Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands, in Medemblik requesting his help. Albrecht, who had gained a reputation as a formidable military commander, accepted and soon conquered all Friesland. Emperor Maximilian of Habsburg appointed Albrecht hereditary potestate and gubernator of Friesland in 1499.\nIn 1515, an army of peasant rebels and mercenaries known as the Arumer Zwarte Hoop started a peasants' revolt against the Habsburg authorities. The leader was the farmer Pier Gerlofs Donia, whose farm had been burned down and whose kinfolk had been killed by a marauding \"Landsknecht\" regiment. Since the regiment had been employed by the Habsburg authorities to suppress the civil war of the Fetkeapers and Skieringers, Donia put the blame on the authorities. After this he gathered angry peasants and some petty noblemen from Frisia and Gelderland and formed the \"Arumer Zwarte Hoop\".The rebels received financial support from Charles II, Duke of Guelders, who claimed the Duchy of Guelders in opposition to the House of Habsburg. Charles also employed mercenaries under command of his military commander Maarten van Rossum in their support. However, when the tides turned against the rebels after the Donia's death in 1520, Charles withdrew his support, without which the rebels could no longer afford to pay their mercenary army. The revolt was put to an end in 1523 and Frisia was incorporated into the Habsburg Netherlands, bringing an end to the Frisian freedom.\nModern times.\nCharles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, became the first lord of the Lordship of Frisia. He appointed Georg Schenck van Toutenburg, who had crushed the peasants' revolt, as Stadtholder to rule over the province in his stead. When Charles abdicated in 1556, Frisia was inherited by Philip II of Spain along with the rest of the Netherlands. In 1566, Frisia joined the Dutch Revolt against Spanish rule.\nIn 1577, George de Lalaing, Count of Rennenberg was appointed Stadtholder of Frisia and other provinces. A moderate, trusted by both sides, he tried to reconcile the rebels with the Crown. But in 1580, Rennenburg declared for Spain. The States of Frisia raised troops and took his strongholds of Leeuwarden, Harlingen and Stavoren. Rennenburg was deposed and Frisia became the fifth Lordship to join the rebels' Union of Utrecht. From 1580 onward, all stadtholders were members of the House of Orange-Nassau. With the Peace of M\u00fcnster in 1648, Frisia became a full member of the independent Dutch Republic, a federation of provincies. In economic and therefore also political importance, Friesland was next in rank to the provinces of Holland and Zeeland.\nIn 1798, three years after the Batavian Revolution, the provincial lordship of Frisia was abolished and its territory was divided between the Eems and Oude IJssel departments. This was short-lived, however, as Frisia was revived, however as a department in 1802. When the Netherlands were annexed by the First French Empire in 1810, the department was in French renamed Frise. After Napoleon was defeated in 1813 and a new constitution was introduced in 1814, Friesland became a province of the Sovereign Principality of the United Netherlands, then of the unitary Kingdom of the Netherlands a year later.\nGeography.\nFriesland is situated at in the northwest of the Netherlands, west of the province of Groningen, northwest of Drenthe and Overijssel, north of Flevoland, northeast of the IJsselmeer and North Holland, and south of the North Sea. It is the largest province of the Netherlands if one includes areas of water; in terms of land area only, it is the third-largest province.\nMost of Friesland is on the mainland, but it also includes a number of West Frisian Islands, including Vlieland, Terschelling, Ameland and Schiermonnikoog, which are connected to the mainland by ferry. The province's highest point is a dune at above sea level, on the island of Vlieland.\nThere are four national parks of the Netherlands located in Friesland: Schiermonnikoog, De Alde Feanen, Lauwersmeer (partially in Groningen), and Drents-Friese Wold (also partially situated in Drenthe).\nUrban areas.\nThe ten urban areas in Friesland with the largest population are:\nMunicipalities.\nThe province is divided into 18 municipalities, each with local government (municipal council, mayor and aldermen).\nClimate.\nThe province of Friesland has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Cfb).\nDemography.\nIn 2020, Friesland had a population of 649,944 and a population density of .\nThe years 1880\u20131900 show slower population growth due to a farm crisis during which some 20,000 Frisians emigrated to the United States.\nAnthropometry.\nSince the late Middle Ages, Friesland has been renowned for the exceptional height of its inhabitants, who were deemed among the tallest groups of Indo-Europeans. Even early Renaissance poet Dante Alighieri refers to the height of Frisians in his \"Divine Comedy\" when, in the canticle about Hell, he talks about the magnitude of an infernal demon by stating that \"not even three tall Frieslanders, were they set one upon the other, would have matched his height\".\nEconomy.\nFriesland is mainly an agricultural province. The black and white Frisian cattle, black and white Stabyhoun and the black Frisian horse originated here. Tourism is another important source of income: the principal tourist destinations include the lakes in the southwest of the province and the islands in the Wadden Sea to the north. There are 195 windmills in the province of Friesland, out of a total of about 1200 in the entire country.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 19.8 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 2.6% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 26,700 \u20ac or 89% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nFriesland is the only one of the twelve provinces of the Netherlands to have its own language that is recognized as such, West Frisian. Before the 18th century, varieties of Frisian were also spoken in the provinces of North-Holland and Groningen, and together with the Frisian speakers in East-Friesland and North-Friesland a continuous linguistic area existed between Amsterdam and the present day Danish-German border.\nAccording to a study carried out in 2007, West Frisian is the native language of the 54.3% of the inhabitants of the province of Friesland, followed by Dutch with 34.7%, and speakers of other regional languages, most of these restricted to Friesland, with 9.7%, and in the end other foreign languages with 1.4%. Frisian speakers are traditionally underrepresented in urban areas, and predominant in the countryside.\nWest-Frisian is also spoken in a small adjacent part of the province of Groningen. Up to the 18th century Frisian was spoken in the, at that time Prussian and Hannoveran, lordships of Ost-Friesland (East-Friesland). Since then the Ost-Frisian population switched to East Frisian (\"Ostfriesisch\"), a Low German dialect. Only in some, formerly remoted, East-Frisian villages (Saterland) a variety of historically East Frisian (\"Seeltersk\") is still in use but by an older generation. A collection of dialects named North Frisian, is or was spoken in North Friesland, alongside the North See Coast and on the islands of Slesvig-Holstein. The named Frisian languages are historically related to Old English, which points towards the fact that Angles and Saxons, eventually accompanied by Frisians, came from these areas.\nIn Stellingwerf, in south-east Friesland, a dialect of Low Saxon is spoken.\nThe language policy in Friesland is preservation. West Frisian is a mandatory subject in Friesland in primary and secondary schools of the Frisian speaking districts. The bilingual (Dutch-Frisian) and trilingual (Dutch-English-Frisian) schools in the province of Friesland use in some lessons West-Frisian as a language of instruction, besides Dutch in most other lessons and next to them English. Literacy in Frisian however, is not often a core aim and that makes the number of Frisians speakers able to write in Frisian only 12%.\nThe provincial government takes various initiatives to preserve the West Frisian language. All parents in Friesland receive, at their children's birth, information about language and multilingualism (ex. 'taaltaske'). To support the use of Frisian in public and at public events, the province also invests in the development of speech pathology materials and strives to create information technology devices for the West Frisian language. The Frisian government subsidizes the Af\u00fbk organization, which offers language courses and actively promotes Frisian in all sectors of society as well as the corporate domain which as a rule is dominated by Dutch and Modern English. The province also promotes a wide range of art and entertainment in Frisian.\nSports.\nThe province is famous for its speed skaters, with mass participation in cross-country ice skating when weather conditions permit. When winters are cold enough to allow the freshwater canals to freeze hard, the province holds its traditional Elfstedentocht (Eleven cities tour), a ice skating tour. A traditional sport is Frisian handball. Another Frisian practice is \"fierljeppen\", a sport with some similarities to pole vaulting. A jump consists of an intense sprint to the pole (\"polsstok\"), jumping and grabbing it, then climbing to the top while trying to control the pole's forward and lateral movements over a body of water and finishing with a graceful landing on a sand bed opposite to the starting point. Because of all the diverse skills required in fierljeppen, fierljeppers are considered to be very complete athletes with superbly developed strength and coordination. In the warmer months, many Frisians practice \"wadlopen\", the traditional art of wading across designated sections of the Wadden Sea at low tide.\nThere are currently two top level football clubs playing in Friesland: SC Cambuur from Leeuwarden (home stadium Cambuur Stadion) and SC Heerenveen (home stadium Abe Lenstra Stadion).\nPolitics.\nThe King's Commissioner of Friesland is Arno Brok. The Provincial Council of Friesland has 43 seats. The Provincial Executive is a coalition of the Christian Democratic Appeal, the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, the Labour Party and the Frisian National Party (FNP).\n!colspan=\"2\" align=\"left\"|Party\n!Votes\n!Seats\n!colspan=\"2\" align=\"left\"|Total\n! 298.241\n!align=\"center\" | 43\nTransport.\nThe four motorways in the province are A6, A7 (E22), A31, and A32.\nThe main railway station of Friesland is Leeuwarden, which connects the railways Arnhem\u2013Leeuwarden, Harlingen\u2013Nieuweschans, and Leeuwarden\u2013Stavoren which are all (partially) located in the province.\nAmeland Airport near Ballum and Drachten Airfield near Drachten are the two general aviation airports in the province. The Royal Netherlands Air Force uses Vlieland Heliport and the Leeuwarden Air Base.\nMedia.\n\"Friesch Dagblad\" and \"Leeuwarder Courant\" are daily newspapers mainly written in Dutch. Omrop Frysl\u00e2n is the public broadcaster with radio and TV programs mainly in Frisian."}
{"id": "11255", "revid": "835170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11255", "title": "Freuds", "text": ""}
{"id": "11257", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11257", "title": "Feminist science fiction", "text": "Feminist science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction (abbreviated \"SF\") focused on theories that include feminist themes including but not limited to gender inequality, sexuality, race, economics, and reproduction. Feminist SF is political because of its tendency to critique the dominant culture. Some of the most notable feminist science fiction works have illustrated these themes using utopias to explore a society in which gender differences or gender power imbalances do not exist, or dystopias to explore worlds in which gender inequalities are intensified, thus asserting a need for feminist work to continue.\nHistory.\nFeminist science fiction (SF) distinguishes between \"female\" SF authors and \"feminist\" SF authors. Both female and feminist SF authors are historically significant to the feminist SF subgenre, as female writers have increased women's visibility and perspectives in SF literary traditions, while the feminist writers have foregrounded political themes and tropes in their works. Because distinctions between female and feminist can be blurry, whether a work is considered feminist can be debatable, but there are generally agreed-upon canonical texts, which help define the subgenre.\nEarly modern England.\nAs early as the English Restoration, female authors were using themes of SF and imagined futures to explore women's issues, roles, and place in society. This can be seen as early as 1666 in Margaret Cavendish's \"The Blazing World\", in which she describes a utopian kingdom ruled by an empress. This foundational work has garnered attention from some feminist critics, such as Dale Spender, who considered this a forerunner of the science fiction genre, more generally. Another early female writer of science fiction was Mary Shelley. Her novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818) dealt with the asexual creation of new life, and has been considered by some a reimagining of the Adam and Eve story.\nFirst-wave feminism (suffrage).\nWomen writers involved in the utopian literature movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries could be considered the first feminist SF authors. Their texts, emerging during the first-wave feminist movement, often addressed issues of sexism through imagining different worlds that challenged gender expectations. In 1881, \"Mizora: A Prophecy\" described a women-only world with technological innovations such as parthenogenesis, videophones, and artificial meat.\nIt was closely followed by other feminist utopian works, such as Elizabeth Burgoyne Corbett's \"New Amazonia: A Foretaste of the Future\" (1889). In 1892, poet and abolitionist Frances Harper published \"Iola Leroy\", one of the first novels by an African American woman. Set during the antebellum South, it follows the life of a mixed race woman with mostly white ancestry and records the hopes of many African Americans for social equality\u2014of race and gender\u2014during Reconstruction. \"Unveiling a Parallel\" (1893) features a male protagonist who takes an \"aeroplane\" to Mars, visiting two different \"Marsian\" societies; in both, there is equality between men and women. In one, Paleveria, women have adopted the negative characteristics of men; in Caskia, the other, gender equality \"has made both sexes kind, loving, and generous.\" Two American Populists, A.O. Grigsby and Mary P. Lowe, published \"NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages\" (1900), which explores issues of gender norms and posited structural inequality. This recently rediscovered novel displays familiar feminist SF conventions: a heroine narrator who masquerades as a man, the exploration of sexist mores, and the description of a future hollow earth society (like \"Mizora\") where women are equal.\n\"The Sultana's Dream\" (1905), by Bengali Muslim feminist Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain, engages with the limited role of women in colonial India. Through depicting a gender-reversed purdah in an alternate technologically futuristic world, Hussain's book has been described as illustrating the potential for cultural insights through role reversals early on in the subgenre's formation. In the utopian novel \"Beatrice the Sixteenth\" (1909), transgender writer Irene Clyde creates a world where gender is no longer recognized and the story itself is told without the use of gendered nouns. Along these same lines, Charlotte Perkins Gilman explores and critiques the expectations of women and men by creating a single-sex world in \"Herland\" (1915), possibly the most well-known of the early feminist SF and utopian novels.\nBetween the wars.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, many popular pulp science fiction magazines exaggerated views of masculinity and featured portrayals of women that were perceived as sexist. These views would be subtly satirized by Stella Gibbons in \"Cold Comfort Farm\" (1932) and much later by Margaret Atwood in \"The Blind Assassin\" (2000). As early as 1920, however, women writers of this time, such as Clare Winger Harris (\"The Runaway World,\" 1926) and Gertrude Barrows Bennett (\"Claimed\", 1920), published science fiction stories written from female perspectives and occasionally dealt with gender and sexuality based topics.\nJohn Wyndham, writing under his early pen-name of John Beynon Harris, was a rare pulp writer to include female leads in stories such as The Venus Adventure (Wonder Stories, 1932), in which a mixed crew travel to Venus. The story opens in a future in which women are no longer enslaved by pregnancy and childbirth thanks to artificial incubators, which are opposed by a religious minority. Women have used this freedom to enter professions including chemistry. Wyndham's outlook was so rare that in a serialisation of his novel Stowaway to Mars, one magazine editor \"corrected\" the name of the central character Joan to John. Wyndham then had to write them a new final instalment to replace the conclusion in which Joan fell in love and became pregnant. \nPost World War II.\nThe Post-WWII and Cold War eras were a pivotal and often overlooked period in feminist SF history. During this time, female authors utilized the SF genre to assess critically the rapidly changing social, cultural, and technological landscape. Women SF authors during the post-WWII and Cold War time periods directly engage in the exploration of the impacts of science and technology on women and their families, which was a focal point in the public consciousness during the 1950s and 1960s. These female SF authors, often published in SF magazines such as \"The Avalonian\", \"Astounding\", \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\", and \"Galaxy\", which were open to new stories and authors that pushed the boundaries of form and content.\nAt the beginning of the Cold War, economic restructuring, technological advancements, new domestic technologies (washing machines, electric appliances), increased economic mobility of an emerging middle class, and an emphasis on consumptive practices, carved out a new technological domestic sphere where women were circumscribed to a new job description \u2013 the professional housewife. Published feminist SF stories were told from the perspectives of women (characters and authors) who often identified within traditional roles of housewives or homemakers, a subversive act in many ways given the traditionally male-centered nature of the SF genre and society during that time.\nIn \"Galactic Suburbia\", author Lisa Yaszek recovers many women SF authors of the post-WWII era such as Judith Merril, author of \"That Only a Mother\" (1948), \"Daughters of Earth\" (1952), \"Project Nursemaid\" (1955), \"The Lady Was a Tramp\" (1957); Alice Eleanor Jones \"Life, Incorporated\" (1955), \"The Happy Clown\" (1955), \"Recruiting Officer\" (1955); and Shirley Jackson \"One Ordinary Day, with Peanuts\" (1955) and \"The Omen\" (1958). These authors often blurred the boundaries of feminist SF fiction and feminist speculative fiction, but their work laid substantive foundations for second-wave feminist SF authors to directly engage with the feminist project. \"Simply put, women turned to SF in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s because it provided them with growing audiences for fiction that was both socially engaged and aesthetically innovative.\"\nSecond-wave feminism.\nBy the 1960s, science fiction was combining sensationalism with political and technological critiques of society. With the advent of second-wave feminism, women's roles were questioned in this \"subversive, mind expanding genre\". Three notable texts of this period are Ursula K. Le Guin's \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" (1969), Marge Piercy's \"Woman on the Edge of Time\" (1976) and Joanna Russ' \"The Female Man\" (1970). Each highlights what the authors believe to be the socially constructed aspects of gender roles by creating worlds with genderless societies. Two of these authors were pioneers in feminist criticism of science fiction during the 1960s and 70s through essays collected in \"The Language of the Night\" (Le Guin, 1979) and \"How To Suppress Women's Writing\" (Russ, 1983). Men also contributed literature to feminist science fiction. Prominently, Samuel R. Delany's short story, \"Time Considered as a Helix of Semi-Precious Stones\" (1968), which won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story in 1970, follows the life of a gay man that includes themes involving sadomasochism, gender, significance of language, and when high and low society encounter one another, while his novel \"Babel-17\" has an autistic woman of colour as its primary hero and protagonist. Octavia Butler's \"Kindred\" (1979) tells the story of an African American woman living in the United States in 1979 who uncontrollably time travels to the antebellum South. The novel poses complicated questions about the nature of sexuality, gender, and race when the present faces the past.\n1980s onwards.\nFeminist science fiction continues on into the 1980s with Margaret Atwood's novel \"The Handmaid's Tale\" (1985), a dystopic tale of a theocratic society in which women have been systematically stripped of all liberty. The book was motivated by fear of potential retrogressive effects on women's rights. Sheri S. Tepper is most known for her series The True Game, which explore the \"Lands of the True Game\", a portion of a planet explored by humanity somewhere in the future. In November 2015, she received the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement for this series. Tepper has written under several pseudonyms, including A. J. Orde, E. E. Horlak, and B. J. Oliphant. Carol Emshwiller is another feminist SF author whose best known works are \"Carmen Dog\" (1988), \"The Mount\" (2002), and \"Mister Boots\" (2005). Emshwiller had also been writing SF for \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\" since 1974. She won the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 2005 for her novel \"The Mount\" (2002). This novel explores the prey/predator mentality through an alien race. Another author of the 1980s, Pamela Sargent has written the \"Seed Series\", which included \"Earthseed\", \"Farseed\", and \"Seed Seeker\" (1983\u20132010), the \"Venus Series\" about the terraforming of Venus, which includes \"Venus of Dreams\", \"Venus of Shadows\", and \"Child of Venus\" (1986\u20132001), and \"The Shore of Women\" (1986). Sargent is also the 2012 winner of the Pilgrim Award for lifetime contributions to SF/F studies. Lois McMaster Bujold has won both the Hugo Award and the Nebula Award for her novella \"The Mountains of Mourning\", which is part of her series the \"Vorkosigan Saga\" (1986\u20132012). This saga includes points of view from a number of minority characters, and is also highly concerned with medical ethics, identity, and sexual reproduction.\nMore recent science fiction authors illuminate what they contend are injustices that are still prevalent. At the time of the LA Riots, Japanese-American writer Cynthia Kadohata's work \"In the Heart of the Valley of Love\" (1992) was published. Her story, set in the year 2052, examines tensions between two groups as defined as the \"haves\" and the \"have-nots\" and is written as seen through the eyes of a nineteen-year-old girl who is of Asian and African descent. Nalo Hopkinson's \"Falling in Love With Hominids\" (2015) is a collection of her short stories whose subjects range from an historical fantasy involving colonialism in the Caribbean, to age manipulation, to ethnic diversity in the land of Faerie, among others.\nIn the early 1990s, a new award opportunity for feminist SF authors was created. The James Tiptree, Jr. Award is an annual literary prize for works of science fiction or fantasy that expand or explore one's understanding of gender (Alice Sheldon was a female writer who published science fiction under the Tiptree pen name). Science fiction authors Pat Murphy and Karen Joy Fowler initiated this subsequent discussion at WisCon in February 1991. The authors' publishing in feminist SF after 1991 were now eligible for an award named after one of the genre's beloved authors. Karen Joy Fowler herself is considered a feminist SF writer for her short stories, such as \"What I Didn't See\", for which she received the Nebula Award in 2004. This story is an homage to Sheldon, and describes a gorilla hunting expedition in Africa. Pat Murphy won a number of awards for her feminist SF novels as well, including her second novel \"The Falling Woman\" (1986), a tale of personal conflict and visionary experiences set during an archaeological field study for which she won the Nebula Award in 1988. She won another Nebula Award in the same year for her story \"Rachel in Love\". Her short story collection, \"Points of Departure\" (1990) won the Philip K. Dick Award, and her 1990 novella \"Bones\" won the 1991 World Fantasy Award.\nOther winners of the James Tiptree, Jr. Award include \"The Sparrow\" by Mary Doria Russell (1996), \"Black Wine\" by Candas Jane Dorsey (1997), \"Redwood and Wildfire\" by Andrea Hairston (2011), \"The Drowning Girl\" by Caitlin R. Kiernan (2012), \"The Carhullan Army\" by Sarah Hall (2007), \"Ammonite\" by Nicola Griffith (1993), and \"The Conqueror's Child\" by Suzy McKee Charnas (1999). All of these authors have had an important impact on the SF world by adding a feminist perspective to the traditionally male genre.\nEileen Gunn's science fiction short story \"Coming to Terms\" received the Nebula Award (2004) in the United States and the Sense of Gender Award (2007) in Japan, and has been nominated twice each for the Hugo Award, Philip K. Dick Award and World Fantasy Award, and short-listed for the James Tiptree, Jr. Award. Her most popular anthology of short stories is \"Questionable Practices\", which includes stories \"Up the Fire Road\" and \"Chop Wood, Carry Water\". She also edited \"The WisCon Chronicles 2: Provocative Essays on Feminism, Race, Revolution, and the Future\" with L. Timmel Duchamp. Duchamp has been known in the feminist SF community for her first novel \"Alanya to Alanya\" (2005), the first of a series of five titled \"The Marq'ssan Cycle\". \"Alanya to Alanya\" is set on a near-future earth controlled by a male-dominated ruling class patterned loosely after the corporate world of today. Duchamp has also published a number of short stories, and is an editor for Aqueduct Press. Lisa Goldstein is another well respected feminist sf author. The novelette \"Dark Rooms\" (2007) is one of her better known works, and another one of her novels, \"The Uncertain Places\", won the Mythopoeic Award for Best Adult Novel in 2012.\nRecurrent themes.\nWorks of feminist science fiction are often similar in the goals they work towards as well as the subjects and plotlines they focus on in order to achieve those goals. Feminist science fiction is science fiction that carries across feminist ideals and the promotion of societal values such as gender equality, and the elimination of patriarchal oppression. Feminist science fiction works often present tropes that are recurrent across science fiction with an emphasis on gender relations and gender roles. Many elements of science fiction, such as cyborgs and implants, as well as utopias and dystopias, are given context in a gendered environment, providing a real contrast with present-day gender relations while remaining a work of science fiction.\nUtopian and dystopian societies.\nRepresentations of utopian and dystopian societies in feminist science fiction place an increased emphasis on gender roles while countering the anti-utopian philosophies of the 20th century. Male philosophers such as John Rawls, Isaiah Berlin, and Michael Oakeshott often criticize the idea of utopia, theorizing that it would be impossible to establish a utopia without violence and hegemony. Many male authored works of science fiction as well as threads of philosophical utopian thought dismiss utopias as something unattainable, whereas in feminist science fiction, utopian society is often presented as something both achievable and desirable.\nAnti-utopian philosophies and feminist science fiction come to odds in the possibility of achieving utopia. In \"Rehabilitating Utopia: Feminist Science Fiction and Finding the Ideal\", an article published in Contemporary Justice Review, philosophers against the dream of utopia argue that \"First is the expectation that utopia justifies violence, second is the expectation that utopia collapses individual desires into one communal norm, and third is the expectation that utopia mandates a robotic focus on problem-solving.\" In feminist science fiction, utopias are often realized through a communal want for an ideal society. One such novel is summarized in the aforementioned article, Charlotte Perkins Gilman's novel \"Herland\", in which \"Gilman perfectly captures the utopian impulse that all problems are solvable. She establishes a society where every consideration about a question aims for the rational answer.\" Gilman's utopia is presented as something attainable and achievable without conflict, neither enabling violence nor extinguishing individualism.\nIn the Parable trilogy by feminist science fiction novelist Octavia Butler, anti-utopian philosophies are criticized via a dystopian setting. In the first novel, \"Parable of the Sower\", following the destruction of her home and family, Lauren Olamina, one of many who live in a dystopian, ungoverned society, seeks to form her own utopian religion entitled 'Earthseed'. Olamina's utopian creation does not justify the use of violence as a means, no matter how expedient, to justify the end, achieving utopia, no matter how desirable. Yet we witness that she cannot avoid violence, as it results from little more than promulgating ideas different from those held by the majority of those living within the current social structure, however disorganized and ungoverned that social structure may be. Butler posits that utopian society can never be achieved as an entity entirely separate from the outside world, one of the more commonly held beliefs about conditions necessary to achieve utopia. Olamina's, and Butler's, utopia is envisioned as a community with a shared vision that is not forced on all within it.\nOne common trend in feminist science fiction utopias is the existence of utopian worlds as single-gendered \u2013 most commonly female. In literary works female utopias are portrayed as free of conflict, and intentionally free of men. The single gendered utopias of female science fiction are free of the conflicts that feminism aims to eliminate, such as patriarchal oppression and the gender inequality inherent in patriarchal society. In a statement about these single gendered utopias, Joanna Russ, author of \"The Female Man\" , theorized that male-only societies were not written because in patriarchal society, male oppression is not as pressing an issue as is female oppression.\nUtopia as an ideal to strive for is not a concept wholly limited to feminist science fiction, however many non-feminist science fiction works often dismiss utopia as an unachievable goal, and as such, believe that pursuits for utopia should be considered dangerous and barren. Anti-utopian theory focuses on the 'how' in the transition from present to society to a utopian future. In feminist science fiction, the achievement of a utopian future depends on the ability to recognize the need for improvement and the perseverance to overcome the obstacles present in creating a utopian society.\nRepresentation of women.\nPerhaps the most obvious attraction of science fiction to women writers \u2013 feminist or not \u2013 is the possibilities it offers for the creation of a female hero. The demands of realism in the contemporary or historical novel set limits which do not bind the universes available to science fiction. Although the history of science fiction reveals few heroic, realistic, or even original images of women, the genre had a potential recognized by the women writers drawn to it in the 1960s and 1970s. Before this time, the appeal for women writers was not that great. The impact of feminism on the science fiction field can be observed not only in science fiction texts themselves, but also on the development of feminist approaches to science fiction criticism and history, as well as conversations and debates in the science fiction community. One of the main debates is about the representation of women in science fiction.\nIn her article \"Redefining Women's Power through Feminist Science Fiction\", Maria DeRose suggests that, \"One of the great early socialists said that the status of women in a society is a pretty reliable index of the degree of civilization of that society. If this is true, then the very low status of women in science fiction should make us ponder about whether science fiction is civilized at all\". The women's movement has made most of us conscious of the fact that Science Fiction has totally ignored women. This \"lack of appreciation\" is the main reason that women are rebelling and actively fighting to be noticed in the field anyway.\nVirginia Wolf relates to this aspect of feminist science fiction in the article \"Feminist Criticism and Science Fiction for Children\". As she discusses the scarcity of women in the field, she states, \"During the first period, that of the nineteenth century, apparently only two women wrote Science Fiction, Mary Shelley and Rhoda Broughton,\" and continues, \"In the early twentieth century, a few women were successful Science Fiction writers\". But, \"The times changed. Repression gave way to questioning and outright rebellion, and in the Science Fiction of the 1960s stylistic innovations and new concerns emerged 'Many of their stories, instead of dealing with the traditional hardware of science fiction, concentrated on the effects that different societies or perceptions would have on individual characters'\". Andre Norton, a semi-well known analyst of Science fiction argues along these lines as well. As Norton explored one or more novels she came across, she realized that the creation of characters and how they are shown is a clear connection to the real world situation. From here, she goes in depth of characters in these feminist novels and relates them to the real world. She concludes here article along these lines. She wanted to get the idea out that feminists have a way to get their voice out there. Now, all their works are famous/ popular enough for their ideas to be let out. Virginia Wolf can attest to this fact. She introduced the idea that women were not represented well in the field till the early 1900s and added to the fact by stating, \"Women are not represented well in Science Fiction\".\nIndividual characters, as we come to know, have their own perception and observation of their surroundings. Characters in novels such as \"The Girl Who Was Plugged In\" by James Tiptree and Margaret Atwood's \"The Handmaid's Tale\" are fully aware of the situation at hand and their role in society. This idea is a continuation of the argument presented by Andre Norton. Wolf argues the same point in her analysis of Le Guin's writing, who has many contributions to the works of feminist Science Fiction. Wolf argues, \"What matters to Le Guin is not what people look like or how they behave but whether or not they have choice and whether or not they receive respect for who they are and what they do rather than on the basis of sex. Feminism is for her not a matter of how many women (or characters in Science Fiction) are housewives but a part of our hope for survival, which she believes lies in the search for balance and integration\". This stirs up many questions about equality (a debate which has been going on for many years) but nobody seems to have an answer. In this continual search for equality, many characters find themselves asking the same question: \"Is Gender Necessary\" (which is, coincidentally, one of Le Guin's novels and also another problem arising from gender biases). Robin Roberts, an American literary historian, addresses the link of these characters and what that means for our society today. Roberts believes that men and women would like to be equal, but are not equal. They should be fighting the same battle when in fact they are fighting each other. She also debates that gender equality has been a problem in every reach of feminism, not just in feminist science fiction. Wolf also tackles this problem, \"As she explains in \"Is Gender Necessary?\", \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" convinced her that if men and women were completely and genuinely equal in their social roles, equal legally and economically, equal in freedom, in responsibility, and in self-esteem, ... our central problem would not be the one it is now: the problem of exploitation\u2014exploitation of the woman, of the weak, of the earth' (p.\u00a0159)\". Science fiction criticism has come a long way from its defensive desire to create a canon. All of these authors demonstrate that science fiction criticism tackles the same questions as other literary criticism: race, gender, and the politics of Feminism itself. Wolf believes that evaluating primarily American texts, written over the past one hundred and twenty years, these critics locate science fiction's merits in its speculative possibilities. At the same time, however, all note that the texts they analyze reflect the issues and concerns of the historical period in which the literature was written. DeRose introduces her article with, in effect, the same argument. She says, \"the power of women in Science Fiction has greatly depreciated in the past few years\".\nGender identity.\nFeminist science fiction offers authors the opportunity to imagine worlds and futures in which women are not bound by the standards, rules, and roles that exist in reality. Rather, the genre creates a space in which the gender binary might be troubled and different sexualities may be explored.\nAs Anna Gilarek explains, issues of gender have been a part of feminist discourse throughout the feminist movement, and the work of authors such as Joanna Russ and Marge Piercy explore and expose gender based oppression. Gilarek outlines two approaches to social critique via Feminist SF: the use of fantastical elements such as \"invented worlds, planets, moons, and lands\", used to call attention to the ills of society by exaggerating them, or a more straightforward approach, \"relying on realist techniques to convey the message about the deficiencies of our world and its social organization, in particular the continued inequality of women\". There are many examples of redefined gender roles and gender identity found in Feminist SF, ranging from the inversion of gendered oppression to the amplification of gender stereotypes and tropes. In the short story \"The Matter of Seggri\", by Ursula Le Guin, traditional gender roles are completely swapped. Men are relegated to roles of athletes and prostitutes while women control the means of production and have exclusive access to education. In Margaret Atwood's \"The Handmaid's Tale\", gendered oppression is exaggerated in a dystopian society in which women's rights are stripped away and fertile women are relegated to the roles of handmaids who will bear children to further the human race. New books continue the dystopian theme of women living in a society which conforms to the wishes of men, at the expense of women's rights and well-being, such as in Louise O'Neill's young adult novel \"Only Ever Yours\". In this work, females are no longer born naturally but are genetically designed before birth to conform to the physical desires of men, then placed in a school in which they are taught not to think (they are never taught to read), and to focus on appearance until they are rated by beauty on a scale at age sixteen, with the top ten becoming the brides of elite men, the middle ten forced into concubinage, and the bottom ten forced to continue their lives as instructors at the school in very humiliating circumstances. At age forty, the women are euthanized. In the post-apocalyptic novel, \"Gather the Daughters\", by Jennie Melamed, females living in an island society are sexually exploited from the time they are girls, are forced to marry at adolescence, and after they become grandmothers must commit suicide.\nOver the decades, SF and feminist SF authors have taken different approaches to criticizing gender and gendered society. Helen Merrick outlines the transition from what Joanna Russ describes as the \"Battle of the Sexes\" tradition to a more egalitarian or androgynous approach. Also known as the \"Dominant Woman\" stories, the \"Battle of the Sexes\" stories often present matriarchal societies in which women have overcome their patriarchal oppressors and have achieved dominance. These stories are representative of an anxiety that perceives women's power as a threat to masculinity and the heterosexual norm. As Merrick explains, \"And whilst they may at least hint at the vision of a more equal gendered social order, this possibility is undermined by figuring female desire for greater equality in terms of a (stereotypical) masculine drive for power and domination.\" Examples of these types of stories, written in the 1920s and 30s through the 50s, include Francis Steven's \"Friend Island\" and Margaret Rupert's \"Via the Hewitt Ray\"; in 1978, Marion Zimmer Bradley released \"The Ruins of Isis\", a novel about a futuristic matriarchy on a human colony planet where the men are extremely oppressed.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, feminist SF authors shifted from the \"Battle of the Sexes\" writing more egalitarian stories and stories that sought to make the feminine more visible. Ursula Le Guin's \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" portrayed an androgynous society in which a world without gender could be imagined. In James Tiptree Jr.'s short story \"Houston, Houston, Do You Read?\", women are able to be seen in their full humanity due to the absence of men in a post-apocalyptic society. Joanna Russ's works, including \"When it Changed\" and \"The Female Man\" are other examples of exploring femininity and a \"deconstruction of the acceptable, liberal 'whole' woman towards a multiple, shifting postmodernist sense of female 'selfhood'\".\nComic books and graphic novels.\nFeminist science fiction is evidenced in the globally popular mediums of comic books, manga, and graphic novels. One of the first appearances of a strong female character was that of the superhero Wonder Woman, co-created by husband and wife team William Moulton Marston and Elizabeth Holloway Marston. In December 1941, Wonder Woman came to life on the pages of \"All Star Comics\", and in the intervening years has been reincarnated in from animated TV series to live-action films, with significant cultural impact. By the early 1960s, Marvel Comics already contained some strong female characters, although they often suffered from stereotypical female weakness such as fainting after intense exertion. By the 1970s and 1980s, true female heroes started to emerge on the pages of comics. This was helped by the emergence of self-identified feminist writers including Ann Nocenti, Linda Fite, and Barbara Kesel. As female visibility in comics increased, the \"fainting heroine\" type began to fade into the past. However, some female comic book writers, such as Gail Simone, believe that female characters are still relegated to plot devices (see \"Women in Refrigerators\").\nFeminism in science fiction sh\u014djo manga has been a theme in the works of Moto Hagio among others, for whom the writings of Ursula K. Le Guin have been a major influence.\nFilm and television.\nFeminism has driven the creation of a considerable body of action-oriented science fiction with female protagonists: Wonder Woman (originally created in 1941) and \"The Bionic Woman\" during the time of the organized women's movement in the 1970s; \"\" and the \"Alien tetralogy\" in the 1980s; and \"Xena, Warrior Princess\", comic book character \"Red Sonja\", and \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". 2001 science fiction TV series \"Dark Angel\" featured a powerful female protagonist, with gender roles between her and the main male character generally reversed.\nHowever, feminists have also created science fiction that directly engages with feminism beyond the creation of female action heroes. Television and film have offered opportunities for expressing new ideas about social structures and the ways feminists influence science. Feminist science fiction provides a means to challenge the norms of society and suggest new standards for how societies view gender. The genre also deals with male/female categories, showing how female roles can differ from feminine roles. Hence feminism influences the film industry by creating new ways of exploring and looking at masculinity/femininity and male/female roles. A contemporary example of feminist science fiction television can be found in \"Orphan Black\", which deals with issues of reproductive justice, science, gender, and sexuality.\nFandom.\nBy the 1970s, the science fiction community was confronting questions of feminism and sexism within science fiction culture itself. Multiple Hugo-winning fan writer and professor of literature Susan Wood and others organized the \"feminist panel\" at the 1976 World Science Fiction Convention against considerable resistance. Reactions to the appearance of feminists among fannish ranks led indirectly to the creation of \"A Women's APA\" and WisCon.\nFeminist science fiction is sometimes taught at the university level to explore the role of social constructs in understanding gender.\nPublications.\nIn the 1970s, the first feminist science fiction publications were created. The most well-known are fanzines \"The Witch and the Chameleon\" (1974\u20131976) and \"Janus\" (1975\u20131980), which later became \"Aurora SF\" (Aurora Speculative Feminism) (1981\u20131987). Windhaven, \"A Journal of Feminist Science Fiction\" was published from 1977 to 1979 by Jessica Amanda Salmonson in Seattle. Special issues of magazines linked to science fiction meetings were also published at that moment, like the Khatru symposium's fanzine \"Women in Science Fiction\" in 1975.\nCritical works.\n\"Femspec\".\n\"Femspec\" is a feminist academic journal specializing in works that challenge gender through speculative genres, including science fiction, fantasy, magical realism, mythic explorations in poetry and post-modern fiction, and horror. There is a conscious multicultural focus of the journal, both in content and in the diverse makeup of its editorial group. The first issue came out in 1999 under the editorial direction of founder Batya Weinbaum, who is still the Editor-in-Chief. \"Femspec\" is still publishing and has brought over 1000 authors, critics and artists into print. Having lost their academic home in May 2003, they increasingly cross genres and print write-ups of all books and media received, as well as of events that feature creative works that imaginatively challenge gender such as intentional communities, performance events, and film festivals."}
{"id": "11258", "revid": "18619822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11258", "title": "Fellatio", "text": "Fellatio (also known as fellation, and in slang as blowjob, BJ, giving head, or sucking off) is an oral sex act involving a person stimulating the penis of another person by using the mouth, throat, or both. Oral stimulation of the scrotum may also be termed \"fellatio\", or colloquially as \"teabagging.\" If fellatio is performed on oneself, the act is called autofellatio.\nFellatio can be sexually arousing for both participants, and may lead to orgasm for the partner being fellated. It may be performed by a sexual partner as foreplay before other sexual activities, such as vaginal or anal intercourse, or as an erotic and physically intimate act of its own. Fellatio creates a risk of contracting sexually transmitted infections (STIs), but the risk is significantly lower than that of vaginal or anal sex, especially for HIV transmission.\nMost countries do not have laws banning the practice of fellatio, though some cultures may consider it taboo. People may also refrain from engaging in fellatio due to personal preference, negative feelings, or sexual inhibitions. Commonly, people do not view oral sex as affecting the virginity of either partner, though opinions on the matter vary. \nEtymology.\nThe English noun \"fellatio\" comes from the Latin ', the past participle of the verb ', meaning to suck. In \"fellatio\" the \"-us\" is replaced by the \"-io\" while the declension stem ends in \"-ion-\", which gives the suffix the form \"-ion\" (cf. French \"fellation\"). The \"-io\"(\"n\") ending is used in English to create nouns from Latin adjectives and it can indicate a state or action wherein the Latin verb is being, or has been, performed.\nFurther English words have been created based on the same Latin root. A person who performs fellatio upon another (i.e. who \"fellates\",) may be termed a \"fellator.\" Latin's gender based declension means this word may be restricted by some English speakers to describing a male. The equivalent term for a female is \"fellatrix\".\nPractice.\nGeneral.\nFellatio can be sexually arousing for both participants, and males who receive fellatio commonly experience orgasm and ejaculation of semen during the act. People may use fellatio as foreplay to sexually arouse their sex partner before vaginal or anal intercourse, or other sexual activity, or they may use it as an erotic and physically intimate act in its own right. The sex partner may be of either sex. When the penis is thrust into someone's mouth, it may be called \"irrumatio\", though the term is rarely used.\nThe essential aspect of fellatio is oral stimulation of the penis through some combination of sucking, use of the tongue and lips, and movement of the mouth. One method is the sex partner taking the penis into the mouth and moving smoothly up and down the penis to a rhythm while being careful to avoid contact with the teeth. Fellatio may also include the oral stimulation of the scrotum, whether licking, sucking or taking the entire scrotum into the mouth. During the act, semen may be ejaculated into the partner's mouth.\nIt is difficult for some people to perform fellatio due to their sensitivities to the natural gag reflex. Different people have different sensitivities to the reflex, but some people learn to suppress the reflex. How much of the penis a partner can take into their mouth also depends on the size and length of the penis, and they most commonly only take the end of the penis into their mouth.\nIt is physically possible for men with sufficient flexibility, penis size, or both, to perform fellatio on themselves as a form of masturbation, in an act called autofellatio. However, few men possess sufficient flexibility and penis length to safely perform the necessary frontbend.\nIngestion of semen.\nDuring fellatio, a partner may ingest semen from the penis. Nancy Friday's book, \"Men in Love \u2013 Men's Sexual Fantasies: The Triumph of Love over Rage\" (1982), suggests that swallowing semen is high on a man's intimacy scale. As late as 1976, some doctors were advising women in the eighth and ninth months of pregnancy not to swallow semen lest it induce premature labor, though it is now known to be safe.\nDeep-throating.\nDeep-throating is a sexual act in which a person takes a partner's entire erect penis into the mouth and throat. The technique and term became popularized by the 1972 pornographic film \"Deep Throat\". Generally, the person receiving fellatio is in control. For deep-throating, the penis has to be long enough so that it can reach the back of the giver's throat.\nDeep-throating can be difficult, due to the natural gag reflex triggered when the soft palate is touched. People have different sensitivities to this reflex, and with practice, some people learn to suppress it. Deep-throating leads to an entirely different kind of oral stimulation in comparison to regular fellatio: the tongue is immobilized during deep-throating and sucking becomes impossible; the glans penis can be intensely stimulated by the tightness of the pharynx.\nOther aspects.\nThe man receiving fellatio receives direct sexual stimulation, while his partner may derive satisfaction from giving him pleasure. Giving and receiving fellatio may happen simultaneously in sex positions like 69 and daisy chain.\nFellatio is sometimes practiced when penile penetration would create a physical difficulty for a sex partner. For example, it may be practiced during pregnancy instead of vaginal intercourse by couples wishing to engage in intimate sexual activity while avoiding the difficulty of vaginal intercourse during later stages of pregnancy.\nThere may be other reasons why a woman may not wish to have vaginal intercourse, such as apprehension of losing her virginity or of becoming pregnant, or she may be menstruating.\nHealth aspects.\nSexually transmitted infections.\nChlamydia, human papillomavirus (HPV), gonorrhea, herpes, hepatitis (multiple strains), and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs/STDs) can be transmitted through oral sex. Any sexual exchange of bodily fluids with a person infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, poses a risk of infection. Risk of STI infection, however, is generally considered significantly lower for oral sex than for vaginal or anal sex, with HIV transmission considered the lowest risk with regard to oral sex.\nThere is an increased risk of STI transmission if the receiving partner has wounds on his genitals, or if the giving partner has wounds or open sores on or in his or her mouth, or bleeding gums. Brushing the teeth, flossing, or undergoing dental work soon before or after giving fellatio can also increase the risk of transmission, because all of these activities can cause small scratches in the lining of the mouth. These wounds, even when they are microscopic, increase the chances of contracting STIs that can be transmitted orally under these conditions. Such contact can also lead to more mundane infections from common bacteria and viruses found in, around and secreted from the genital regions. Because of the aforementioned factors, medical sources advise the use of condoms or other effective barrier methods when performing or receiving fellatio with a partner whose STI status is unknown.\nHPV and oral cancer link.\nLinks have been reported between oral sex and oral cancer with HPV-infected people. A 2005 research study suggested that performing unprotected oral sex on a person infected with HPV might increase the risk of oral cancer. The study found that 36 percent of the cancer patients had HPV compared to only 1 percent of the healthy control group.\nA 2007 study suggested a correlation between oral sex and throat cancer. It is believed that this is due to the transmission of HPV, a virus that has been implicated in the majority of cervical cancers and which has been detected in throat cancer tissue in numerous studies. The study concludes that people who had one to five oral sex partners in their lifetime had approximately a doubled risk of throat cancer compared with those who never engaged in this activity and those with more than five oral sex partners had a 250 percent increased risk.\nPregnancy and semen exposure.\nFellatio cannot result in pregnancy, as there is no way for ingested sperm to reach the uterus and fallopian tubes to fertilize an egg. At any rate, acids in the stomach and digestive enzymes in the digestive tract break down and kill spermatozoa.\nClinical research has tentatively linked fellatio with immune modulation, indicating it may reduce the chance of complications during pregnancy. The potentially fatal complication pre-eclampsia was observed to occur less in women who regularly engaged in fellatio, with those who also ingested their partner's semen being at the least risk. The results were consistent with the fact that semen contains TGF-\u03b21, the exchange of which between partners having a causal reduction in risk of pre-eclampsia caused by an immunological reaction. It is worth noting that fellatio is not the only viable mechanism for the transmission of TGF-\u03b21.\nCultural views.\nVirginity.\nOral sex is commonly used as a means of preserving virginity, especially among heterosexual pairings; this is sometimes termed \"technical virginity\" (which additionally includes anal sex, mutual masturbation and other non-penetrative sex acts, but excludes penile-vaginal sex). The concept of \"technical virginity\" or sexual abstinence through oral sex is particularly popular among teenagers in the United States, including with regard to teenage girls who not only fellate their boyfriends to preserve their virginities, but also to create and maintain intimacy or to avoid pregnancy. Other reasons given for the practice among teenage girls are peer-group pressure and as their introduction to sexual activity. Additionally, gay males may regard fellatio as a way of maintaining their virginities, with penile-anal penetration defined as resulting in virginity loss, while other gay males may define fellatio as their main form of sexual activity.\nLegality.\nFellatio is legal in most countries. Laws of some jurisdictions regard fellatio as penetrative sex for the purposes of sexual offenses with regard to the act, but most countries do not have laws which ban the practice, in contrast to anal sex or extramarital sex. In Islamic literature, the only forms of sexual activity that are consistently explicitly prohibited within marriage are anal sex and sexual activity during menstruation. However, the exact attitude towards oral sex is a subject of disagreements between modern scholars of Islam. Authorities considering it \"objectionable\" do so because of the penis's supposedly impure fluids coming in contact with the mouth. Others emphasize that there is no decisive evidence to forbid oral sex.\nIn Malaysia, fellatio is illegal, but the law is seldom enforced. Under Malaysia's Section 377A of the Penal Code, the introduction of the penis into the anus or mouth of another person is considered a \"carnal intercourse against the order of nature\" and is punishable with imprisonment of 20 years maximum and whipping.\nTradition.\nGalienus called fellatio \"lesbiari\" since women of the island of Lesbos were supposed to have introduced the practice of using one's lips to give sexual pleasure.\nThe Ancient Indian \"Kama Sutra\", dating from the first century AD, describes oral sex, discussing fellatio in great detail (the \"Kama Sutra\" has a chapter on (or ), \"mouth congress\") and only briefly mentioning cunnilingus. However, according to the \"Kama Sutra\", fellatio is above all a characteristic of eunuchs (or, according to other translations, of effeminate homosexuals or trans women similar to the modern Hijra of India), who use their mouths as a substitute for female genitalia.\nV\u0101tsy\u0101yana, the author of the \"Kama Sutra\", states that it is also practiced by \"unchaste women\", but mentions that there are widespread traditional concerns about this being a degrading or unclean practice, with known practitioners being evaded as love partners in large parts of the country. The author appears to somewhat agree with these attitudes, claiming that \"a wise man\" should not engage in that form of intercourse while acknowledging that it can be appropriate in some unspecified cases.\nThe Moche culture of ancient Peru worshipped daily life including sexual acts. They depicted fellatio in their ceramics.\nIn some cultures, such as Cambodia, Chinese in Southeast Asia, northern Manchu tribes along Amur River, Sambians in Papua New Guinea, Thailand, Telugus of India, Hawaii and other Pacific Islanders, briefly taking the penis of a male infant or toddler into one's mouth was considered a nonsexual form of affection or even a form of ritual, greeting, respect, parenting love, or lifesaving. According to some sources, it was an ancient Chinese custom for grandmothers, mothers, and elder sisters to calm their baby boys with fellatio. It has also been reported that some modern Chinese mothers have performed fellatio to their moribund sons as affection and means for lifesaving, because they culturally believe that when the penis is completely retracted into the abdomen, the boy or man will die.\nOther animals.\nFlying foxes have been observed engaging in oral sex. Indian flying fox males will lick a female's vulva both before and after copulation, with the length of pre-copulation cunnilingus positively correlated with length of copulation. The fruit bat \"Cynopterus sphinx\", has been observed to engage in fellatio during mating. Pairs spend more time copulating if the female licks the male than if she does not. Male Livingstone's fruit bats have been observed engaging in homosexual fellatio, although it is unknown if this is an example of sexual behavior or social grooming. Bonin flying foxes also engage in homosexual fellatio, but the behavior has been observed independently of social grooming."}
{"id": "11259", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11259", "title": "Fatwa", "text": "A fatw\u0101 (, ; ; plural fat\u0101w\u0101 ) is a nonbinding legal opinion on a point of Islamic law (\"sharia\") given by a qualified jurist in response to a question posed by a private individual, judge or government. A jurist issuing fatwas is called a \"mufti\", and the act of issuing fatwas is called ift\u0101\u02be. Fatwas have played an important role throughout Islamic history, taking on new forms in the modern era.\nResembling \"jus respondendi\" in Roman law and rabbinic \"responsa\", privately issued fatwas historically served to inform Muslim populations about Islam, advise courts on difficult points of Islamic law, and elaborate substantive law. In later times, public and political fatwas were issued to take a stand on doctrinal controversies, legitimize government policies or articulate grievances of the population. During the era of European colonialism, fatwas played a part in mobilizing resistance to foreign domination.\nMuftis acted as independent scholars in the classical legal system. Over the centuries, Sunni muftis were gradually incorporated into state bureaucracies, while Shia jurists in Iran progressively asserted an autonomous authority starting from the early modern era.\nIn the modern era, fatwas have reflected changing economic, social and political circumstances, and addressed concerns arising in varied Muslim communities. The spread of codified state laws and Western-style legal education in the modern Muslim world has displaced muftis from their traditional role of clarifying and elaborating the laws applied in courts. Instead, modern fatwas have increasingly served to advise the general public on other aspects of sharia, particularly questions regarding religious rituals and everyday life. Modern public fatwas have addressed and sometimes sparked controversies in the Muslim world, and some fatwas in recent decades have gained worldwide notoriety. The legal methodology of modern \"ifta\" often diverges from pre-modern practice, particularly so in the West. Emergence of modern media and universal education has transformed the traditional institution of \"ifta\" in various ways. While the proliferation of contemporary fatwas attests to the importance of Islamic authenticity to many Muslims, little research has been done to determine how much these fatwas affect the beliefs or behavior of the Muslim public.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"fatwa\" comes from the Arabic root \"f-t-y\", whose meanings include 'youth, newness, clarification, explanation'. A number of terms related to \"fatwa\" derive from the same root. A jurist issuing fatwas is called a \"mufti\". The person who asks for a fatwa is known as \"mustafti\". The act of issuing fatwas is called \"ift\u0101\u02be\". The term \"futy\u0101\" refers to soliciting and issuing fatwas.\nIn older English language works the spelling fetva, from Turkish, is used, relating to the Ottoman Empire.\nOrigins.\nThe origins of the \"fatwa\" can be traced back to the Quran. On a number of occasions, the Quranic text instructs the Islamic prophet Muhammad how to respond to questions from his followers regarding religious and social practices. Several of these verses begin with the phrase \"When they ask you concerning ..., say ...\" In two cases (4:127, 4:176) this is expressed with verbal forms of the root \"f-t-y\", which signify asking for or giving an authoritative answer. In the hadith literature, this three-way relationship between God, Muhammad, and believers, is typically replaced by a two-way consultation, in which Muhammad replies directly to queries from his Companions (\"sahaba\").\nAccording to Islamic doctrine, with Muhammad's death in 632, God ceased to communicate with mankind through revelation and prophets. At that point, the rapidly expanding Muslim community turned to Muhammad's Companions, as the most authoritative voices among them, for religious guidance, and some of them are reported to have issued pronouncements on a wide range of subjects. The generation of Companions was in turn replaced in that role by the generation of Successors (\"tabi'un\"). The concept of fatwa thus developed in Islamic communities under a question-and-answer format for communicating religious knowledge, and took on its definitive form with development of the classical theory of Islamic law.\nIn pre-modern Islam.\nProcess of \"ift\u0101\u02be\".\nThe legal theory of the fatwa was formulated in the classical texts of \"usul al-fiqh\" (principles of jurisprudence), while more practical guidelines for muftis were found in manuals called \"adab al-mufti\" or \"adab al-fatwa\" (etiquette of the mufti/fatwa).\nFatwas are issued in response to a query. They can range from a simple yes/no answer to a book-length treatise. A short fatwa may state a well-known point of law in response to a question from a lay person, while a \"major\" fatwa may give a judgment on an unprecedented case, detailing the legal reasoning behind the decision. Queries to muftis were supposed to address real and not hypothetical situations and be formulated in general terms, leaving out names of places and people. Since a mufti was not supposed to inquire into the situation beyond the information included in the query, queries regarding contentious matters were often carefully constructed to elicit the desired response. A mufti's understanding of the query commonly depended on their familiarity with local customs and colloquialisms. In theory, if the query was unclear or not sufficiently detailed for a ruling, the mufti was supposed to state these caveats in their response.\nFatwas were solicited by men and women from all social classes. A mufti could be an obscure scholar, who occasionally replied to queries from people in his neighborhood, or, at the other extreme, a famous jurist or a powerful state official. The level of technical detail supplied in a fatwa, such as citations of sources or specification of legal methodologies employed, depended on the technical level of the petitioner. In theory, a petitioner was supposed to verify the mufti's scholarly reputation, but mufti manuals (\"adab al-mufti\") recognized that it would be difficult for a lay person to do so, and advised the petitioner to trust their sense of the mufti's piety and ideally follow the advice of a single scholar known for exemplary morals. The mufti was often a well-known figure in his neighborhood. Some petitioners could choose among several local muftis, while others had to or chose to travel to receive a fatwa. Judges commonly sent letters to solicit fatwas from prominent jurists in another town or even country. Sunni legal theory generally permits the petioner to obtain a fatwa from multiple jurists on the same query, provided that it addresses a real and not hypothetical situation. Some petitioners sought out a second fatwa because they were unsatisfied with the first, and the two sides in a legal dispute generally each sought to obtain a fatwa that would support their position. Muftis often consulted another mufti on difficult cases, though this practice was not foreseen by legal theory, which saw \"futya\" as a transaction between one qualified jurist and one \"unqualified\" petitioner.\nIn theory, a mufti was expected to issue fatwas free of charge. In practice, muftis commonly received support from the public treasury, public endowments or private donations. Taking of bribes was forbidden. Until the 11th or 12th century, the vast majority of jurists held other jobs to support themselves. These were generally lower- and middle-class professions such as tanning, manuscript copying or small trade.\nIn theory, fatwas could be delivered orally or in writing, but it is not clear how common oral fatwas were, aside from those issued by an Ottoman office established specifically for the purpose of issuing oral fatwas. Many routine, written fatwas were delivered directly to the petitioner on the piece of paper containing the query, leaving no documentary trace. However, large collections of ordinary fatwas are preserved in Ottoman and Indian archives. Mufti manuals contained a number of regulations about the standard format of a fatwa, such as avoiding blank space that could be used for a spurious addition and concluding the fatwa with an expression like \"allahu a'lam\" (God knows best). Nonetheless, fatwas took on a variety of forms depending on the local legal culture.\nRole of fatwas.\nThe classical institution of fatwa is similar to \"jus respondendi\" in Roman law and the \"responsa\" in Jewish law.\nFatwas have played three important roles in the classical legal system:\nBefore the rise of modern education, the study of law was a centerpiece of advanced education in the Islamic world. A relatively small class of legal scholars controlled the interpretation of sharia on a wide range of questions essential to the society, ranging from ritual to finance. It was considered a requirement for qualified jurists to communicate their knowledge through teaching or issuing fatwas. The ideal mufti was conceived as an individual of scholarly accomplishments and exemplary morals, and muftis were generally approached with the respect and deference corresponding to these expectations.\nJudges generally sought an opinion from a mufti with higher scholarly authority than themselves for difficult cases or potentially controversial verdicts. Fatwas were routinely upheld in courts, and if a fatwa was disregarded, it was usually because another fatwa supporting a different position was judged to be more convincing. If a party in a dispute was not able to obtain a fatwa supporting their position, they would be unlikely to pursue their case in court, opting for informal mediation instead, or abandoning their claim altogether. Sometimes muftis could be petitioned for a fatwa relating to a court judgement that has already been passed, acting as an informal appeals process, but the extent of this practice and its mechanism varied across history. While in most of the Islamic world judges were not required to consult muftis by any political authority, in Muslim Spain this practice was mandatory, so that a judicial decision was considered invalid without prior approval by a legal specialist.\nAuthor-jurists collected fatwas by muftis of high scholarly reputation and abstracted them into concise formulations of legal norms that could be used by judges, giving a summary of jurisprudence for a particular \"madhhab\" (legal school). Author-jurists sought out fatwas that reflected the social conditions of their time and place, often opting for later legal opinions which were at variance with the doctrine of early authorities. Research by Wael Hallaq and Baber Johansen has shown that fatwa compilations could, and sometimes did, have a significant impact on the development of Islamic law.\nDuring the early centuries of Islam, the roles of mufti, author-jurist and judge were not mutually exclusive. A jurist could lead a teaching circle, conduct a fatwa session, and adjudicate court cases in a single day, devoting his night hours to writing a legal treatise. Those who were able to act in all four capacities were regarded as the most accomplished jurists.\nFrom the standpoint of morality and religious obligation, the term \"fatwa\" has been contrasted with \"taqwa\" (piety, fear of God), particularly in Sufi literature. Fatwas may allow a choice between lenient and strict interpretation of \"sharia\" on a certain matter, or they may employ legalistic stratagems (\"hiyal\") to circumvent a stricter interpretation, while such strategies may not be acceptable from the standpoint of \"taqwa\".\nQualifications of a mufti.\nThe basic prerequisite for issuing fatwas under the classical legal theory was religious knowledge and piety. According to the \"adab al-mufti\" manuals, a mufti must be an adult, Muslim, trusted and reliable, of good character and sound mind, an alert and rigorous thinker, trained as a jurist, and not a sinner. On a practical level, the stature of muftis derived from their reputation for scholarly expertise and upright character.\nAccording to legal theory, it was up to each mufti to decide when he was ready to practice. In practice, an aspiring jurist would normally study for several years with one or several recognized scholars, following a curriculum that included Arabic grammar, hadith, law and other religious sciences. The teacher would decide when the student was ready to issue fatwas by giving him a certificate (\"ijaza\").\nDuring the first centuries of Islam, it was assumed that a mufti was a \"mujtahid\", i.e., a jurist who is capable of deriving legal rulings directly from the scriptural sources through independent reasoning (\"ijtihad\"), evaluating the reliability of hadith and applying or even developing the appropriate legal methodologies. Starting from around 1200 CE, legal theorists began to accept that muftis of their time may not possess the knowledge and legal skill to perform this activity. In addition, it was felt that the major question of jurisprudence had already been addressed by master jurists of earlier times, so that later muftis only had to follow the legal opinions established within their legal school (\"taqlid\"). At that point, the notions of \"mufti\" and \"mujtahid\" became distinguished, and legal theorists classified jurists into three or more levels of competence.\nAmong Twelver Shia, the Akhbari school of jurisprudence, which was predominant for a time during the early modern era, hold a different view on \"ifta\" from the currently predominant Usuli school. According to the Usulis, fatwas can be based on valid conjecture (\"zann\") arrived through \"ijtihad\", and every Muslim who is not qualified to be a \"mujtahid\" should become a follower (\"muqallid\") of a \"mujtahid\". In contrast, Akhbaris hold that all Shia Muslims must be \"muqallids\" of the Twelve Imams, and that fatwas should reflect only knowledge that is certain (\"qat\u02bf\") and based on the traditions of the Imams.\nUnlike the post of \"qadi\", which is reserved for men in the classical sharia system, fatwas could be issued by qualified women as well as men. In practice, the vast majority of jurists who completed the lengthy curriculum in linguistic and religious sciences required to obtain the qualification to issue fatwas were men. Slaves and persons who were blind or mute were likewise theoretically barred from the post of a judge, but not that of mufti.\nFatwa vs. court judgement.\nThe mufti and the judge play different roles in the classical sharia system, with corresponding differences between a fatwa and a \"qada\" (court decision):\nInstitutions.\nBefore the 11th century CE, anyone who possessed scholarly recognition as an Islamic jurist could issue fatwas. Starting around that time, however, the public office of mufti began to appear alongside the private issuing of fatwas. In Khurasan, the rulers appointed a head of the local ulama, called \"shaykh al-Islam\", who also functioned as the chief mufti. The Mamluks appointed four muftis, one for each of the four Sunni madhhabs, to appellate courts in provincial capitals. The Ottomans organized muftis into a hierarchical bureaucracy with a chief mufti of the empire called \"shaykh al-islam\" at the top. The Ottoman \"shaykh al-Islam\" (Turk. \"\u015feyh\u00fclislam\"), was among the most powerful state officials. Scribes reviewed queries directed to Ottoman muftis and rewrote them to facilitate issuing of fatwas. In Mughal India and Safavid Iran the chief mufti had the title of \"sadr\".\nFor the first few centuries of Islam, muftis were educated in informal study circles, but beginning in the 11th and 12th centuries, the ruling elites began to establish institutions of higher religious learning known as madrasas in an effort to secure support and cooperation of the \"ulema\" (religious scholars). Madrasas, which were primarily devoted to the study of law, soon multiplied throughout the Islamic world, helping to spread Islamic learning beyond urban centers and to unite diverse Islamic communities in a shared cultural project.\nIn some states, such as Muslim Spain, muftis were assigned to courts in advisory roles. In Muslim Spain jurists also sat on a \"shura\" (council) advising the ruler. Muftis were additionally appointed to other public functions, such as market inspectors.\nIn Shia Islam.\nWhile the office of the mufti was gradually subsumed into the state bureaucracy in much of the Sunni Muslim world, Shia religious establishment followed a different path in Iran starting from the early modern era. During Safavid rule, independent Islamic jurists (\"mujtahids\") claimed the authority to represent the hidden imam. Under the Usuli doctrine that prevailed among Twelver Shias in the 18th century and under the Qajar dynasty, the \"mujtahids\" further claimed to act collectively as deputies of the imam. According to this doctrine, every Muslim is supposed to choose and follow a high-ranking living \"mujtahid\" bearing the title of \"marja' al-taqlid\", whose fatwas are considered binding, unlike fatwas in Sunni Islam. Thus, in contrast to Sunni muftis, Shia \"mujtahids\" gradually achieved increasing independence from the state.\nPublic and political fatwas.\nWhile most fatwas were delivered to an individual or a judge, some fatwas that were public or political in nature played an important role in religious legitimation, doctrinal disputes, political criticism, or political mobilization. As muftis were progressively incorporated into government bureaucracies in the course of Islamic history, they were often expected to support government policies. Ottoman sultans regularly sought fatwas from the chief mufti for administrative and military initiatives, including fatwas sanctioning jihad against Mamluk Egypt and Safavid Iran. Fatwas by the Ottoman chief mufti were also solicited by the rulers to lend religious legitimacy to new social and economic practices, such as financial and penal laws enacted outside of sharia, printing of nonreligious books (1727) and vaccination (1845).\nAt other times muftis wielded their influence independently of the ruler, and several sultans in Morocco and the Ottoman Empire were dethroned as a result of fatwas issued by influential jurists. This happened, for example, to the Ottoman sultan Murad V on the grounds of his insanity. Public fatwas were also used to dispute doctrinal matters, and in some case to proclaim that certain groups or individuals who professed to be Muslim were to be excluded from the Islamic community (a practice known as \"takfir\"). In both political and scholarly sphere, doctrinal controversies between different states, denominations or centers of learning were accompanied by dueling fatwas. Muftis also acted to counteract the influence of judges and secular functionaries. By articulating grievances and legal rights of the population, public fatwas often prompted an otherwise unresponsive court system to provide redress.\nIn the modern era.\nAnti-colonial fatwas.\nEarly in the era of Western colonialism, several fatwas were issued drawing on the classical legal distinction between lands under Islamic rule (\"dar al-Islam\") and lands of war (\"dar al-harb\") or unbelief (\"dar al-kufr\"). These fatwas classified countries under European domination as lands of war or unbelief and invoked the legal theory obliging Muslims to wage war against the rulers of these lands or emigrate. A number of such fatwas were issued during the 19th century, including in 1803 by Shah Abdul Aziz in India and in 1804 by Usman dan Fodio in West Africa. The unrealistic nature of these fatwas was soon recognized and in 1870 the \"ulama\" of northern India issued fatwas stating that Indian Muslims were not obliged to rebel or emigrate. A similar doctrinal controversy occurred in French-ruled Algeria. The fatwas solicited by the Algerian anti-colonial leader Abd al-Qadir differed in their technical detail, while the French authorities obtained fatwas from local muftis, stating that Muslims living under the rule of unbelievers were not obligated to fight or emigrate as long as they were granted religious freedom by the authorities.\nOn many other occasions, fatwas served as an effective tool for influencing the political process. For example, in 1904 a fatwa by Moroccan ulema achieved the dismissal of European experts hired by the Moroccan government, while in 1907 another Moroccan fatwa succeeded in deposing the sultan on accusation that he failed to mount a defense against French aggression. The 1891 tobacco protest fatwa by the Iranian \"mujtahid\" Mirza Shirazi, which prohibited smoking as long as the British tobacco monopoly was in effect, also achieved its goals.\nModern institutions.\nUnder European colonial rule, the institution of \"dar al-ifta\" was established in a number of madrasas (law colleges) as a centralized place for issuing of fatwas, and these organizations to a considerable extent replaced independent muftis as religious guides for the general population. Following independence, most Muslim states established national organizations devoted to issuing fatwas. One example is the Egyptian Dar al-Ifta, founded in 1895, which has served to articulate a national vision of Islam through fatwas issued in response to government and private queries. National governments in Muslim-majority countries also instituted councils of senior religious scholars to advise the government on religious matters and issue fatwas. These councils generally form part of the ministry for religious affairs, rather than the justice department, which may have a more assertive attitude toward the executive branch.\nWhile chief muftis of earlier times oversaw a hierarchy of muftis and judges applying traditional jurisprudence, most modern states have adopted European-influenced legal codes and no longer employ traditional judicial procedures or traditionally trained judges. State muftis generally promote a vision of Islam that is compatible with state law of their country.\nAlthough some early theorists argued that muftis should not respond to questions on certain subjects, such as theology, muftis have in practice handled queries relating to a wide range of subjects. This trend continued in modern times, and contemporary state-appointed muftis and institutions for \"ifta\" respond to government and private queries on varied issues, including political conflicts, Islamic finance, and medical ethics, contributing to shaping a national Islamic identity.\nThere exists no international Islamic authority to settle differences in interpretation of Islamic law. An International Islamic Fiqh Academy was created by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, but its legal opinions are not binding.\nLegal methodology.\nModern fatwas have been marked by an increased reliance on the process of \"ijtihad\", i.e. deriving legal rulings based on an independent analysis rather than conformity with the opinions of earlier legal authorities (\"taqlid\"). While in the past muftis were associated with a particular school of law (\"madhhab\"), in the 20th century many muftis began to assert their independence from traditional schools of jurisprudence.\nThe most notorious result of disregarding classical jurisprudence are the fatwas of militant extremists who have interpreted the Quran and hadith as supporting suicide bombings, indiscriminate killing of bystanders, and declaration of self-professed Muslims as unbelievers (\"takfir\").\nNew forms of ijtihad have also given rise to fatwas that support such notions as gender equality and banking interest, which are at variance with classical jurisprudence. This is commonly accomplished by application of various traditional legal doctrines such as the \"maqasid\" (objectives) of sharia, \"maslaha\" (public interest) and \"darura\" (necessity), in place of adhering to the letter of scriptural sources. The main argument for this approach is that Islamic law is meant to serve the interest of Muslims and make their lives easier (\"tays\u012br\"). This form of ijtihad is particularly prominent in \"fiqh al-aqall\u012by\u0101t\" (minority jurisprudence), a recently developed branch of Islamic jurisprudence that aims to address the needs of Muslims living in countries with a non-Muslim majority. Its opponents object that sharia is supposed to determine the interests of Muslims, and not the other way around.\nPolitical fatwas and controversies.\nOn November 14, 1914 the Ottoman sultan proclaimed a jihad to mark the official entry of the Ottoman Empire into World War I. The proclamation was supported by a fatwa issued by the Shaykh al-Islam. Contrary to the German hopes that the proclamation would trigger Muslim revolts in British and French colonies, it was either rejected or quietly ignored by their Muslim authorities. It also quickly gave rise to a heated academic debate in Europe. The controversy was sparked by an 1915 article by the prominent Dutch orientalist C. Snouck Hurgronje, titled \"Heilige Oorlog [Holy War] Made in Germany\". In it Hurgronje denounced his German colleagues, who he felt instigated the jihad proclamation in an irresponsible appeal to an antiquated concept that threatened the project of modernizing the Muslim world. The article was widely circulated in an English translation and its accuracy continues to be debated by historians, who acknowledge both the German influence and the internal political calculations of the Ottoman government underlying the proclamation.\nSeveral boycott fatwas were issued in modern times, such as the one issued by Iraqi ulema in 1933, calling on Muslims to boycott Zionist products. In 2004 Yusuf al-Qaradawi issued a fatwa calling for boycott of Israeli and American products, arguing that buying these goods would strengthen the \"enemy\" fighting against Muslims in the struggle over Palestine.\nSome muftis in the modern era, like the mufti of the Lebanese republic in the mid-20th century and the Grand Mufti of the Sultanate of Oman, were important political leaders. In Iran, Ayatollah Khomeini used proclamations and fatwas to introduce and legitimize a number of institutions, including the Council of the Islamic Revolution and the Iranian Parliament.\nKhomeini's most publicized fatwa was the proclamation condemning Salman Rushdie to death for his novel \"The Satanic Verses\". Khomeini himself did not call this proclamation a fatwa, and some scholars have argued that it did not qualify as one, since in Islamic legal theory only a court can decide whether an accused is guilty. However, after the proclamation was presented as a fatwa in Western press, this characterization was widely accepted by both its critics and its supporters, and the Rushdie Affair is credited with bringing the institution of fatwa to world attention. Together with later militant fatwas, it has contributed to the popular misconception of the fatwa as a religious death warrant.\nMany militant and reform movements in modern times have disseminated fatwas issued by individuals who do not possess the qualifications traditionally required of a mufti. A famous example is the fatwa issued in 1998 by Osama bin Laden and four of his associates, proclaiming \"jihad against Jews and Crusaders\" and calling for killing of American civilians. In addition to denouncing its content, many Islamic jurists stressed that bin Laden was not qualified to either issue a fatwa or declare a jihad.\nThe Amman Message was a statement, signed in 2005 in Jordan by nearly 200 prominent Islamic jurists, which served as a \"counter-fatwa\" against a widespread use of \"takfir\" (excommunication) by jihadist groups to justify jihad against rulers of Muslim-majority countries. The Amman Message recognized eight legitimate schools of Islamic law and prohibited declarations of apostasy against them. The statement also asserted that fatwas can be issued only by properly trained muftis, thereby seeking to delegitimize fatwas issued by militants who lack the requisite qualifications.\nErroneous and sometimes bizarre fatwas issued by unqualified or eccentric individuals in recent times have sometimes given rise to complaints about a \"chaos\" in the modern practice of \"ifta\".\nFatwas in the West.\nIn the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks, a group of Middle Eastern Islamic scholars issued a fatwa permitting Muslims serving in the U.S. army to participate in military action against Muslim countries, in response to a query from a U.S. Army Muslim chaplain. This fatwa illustrated two increasingly widespread practices. First, it drew directly on the Quran and hadith without referencing the body of jurisprudence from any of the traditional schools of Islamic law. Secondly, questions from Western Muslims directed to muftis in Muslim-majority countries have become increasingly common, as about one-third of Muslims now live in Muslim-minority countries.\nInstitutions devoted specifically to issuing fatwas to Western Muslims have been established in the West, including the Fiqh Council of North America (FCNA, founded in 1986) and the European Council for Fatwa and Research (ECFR, founded in 1997). These organizations aim to provide fatwas that address the concerns of Muslim minorities, helping them to comply with sharia, while stressing compatibility of Islam with diverse modern contexts. The FCNA was founded with the goal of developing legal methodologies for adopting Islamic law to life in the West. The ECRF draws on all major schools of Sunni law as well as other traditional legal principles, such as concern for the public good, local custom, and the prevention of harm, to derive fatwas suitable for life in Europe. For example, a 2001 ECRF ruling allowed a woman who had converted to Islam to remain married without requiring her husband's conversion, based in part on the existence of European laws and customs under which women are guaranteed the freedom of religion. Rulings of this kind have been welcomed by some, but also criticized by others as being overly eclectic in legal methodology and having potential to negatively impact the interpretation of sharia in Muslim-majority countries.\nThe needs of Western Muslims have given rise to a new branch of Islamic jurisprudence which has been termed the jurisprudence of (Muslim) minorities (\"fiqh al-aqall\u012by\u0101t\"). The term is believed to have been coined in a 1994 fatwa by Taha Jabir Alalwani, then the chairman of FCNA, which encouraged Muslim citizens to participate in American politics. This branch of jurisprudence has since been developed primarily, but not exclusively for Muslim minorities in the West.\nRole of modern media.\nAdvances in communication technology and the rise of the internet have changed the reception and role of fatwas in modern society. In the pre-modern era, most fatwas issued in response to private queries were read only by the petitioner. Early in the 20th century, the reformist Islamic scholar Rashid Rida responded to thousands of queries from around the Muslim world on a variety of social and political topics in the regular \"fatwa\" section of his Cairo-based journal \"Al-Manar\". In the late 20th century, when the Grand Mufti of Egypt Sayyid Tantawy issued a fatwa allowing interest banking, the ruling was vigorously debated in the Egyptian press by both religious scholars and lay intellectuals.\nIn the internet age, a large number of websites has appeared offering fatwas to readers around the world. For example, IslamOnline publishes an archive of \"live fatwa\" sessions, whose number approached a thousand by 2007, along with biographies of the muftis. Together with satellite television programs, radio shows and fatwa hotlines offering call-in fatwas, these sites have contributed to the rise of new forms of contemporary \"ifta\". Unlike the concise or technical pre-modern fatwas, fatwas delivered through modern mass media often seek to be more expansive and accessible to the wide public.\nModern media have also facilitated cooperative forms to \"ifta\". Networks of muftis are commonly engaged by fatwa websites, so that queries are distributed among the muftis in the network, who still act as individual jurisconsults. In other cases, Islamic jurists of different nationalities, schools of law, and sometimes even denominations (Sunni and Shia), coordinate to issue a joint fatwa, which is expected to command greater authority with the public than individual fatwas. The collective fatwa (sometimes called \"ijtih\u0101d jam\u0101\u02bf\u012b\", \"collective legal interpretation\") is a new historical development, and it is found in such settings as boards of Islamic financial institutions and international fatwa councils.\nSocial role of fatwas.\nAs the role of fatwas on strictly legal issues has declined in modern times, there has been a relative increase in the proportion of fatwas dealing with rituals and further expansion in purely religious areas like Quranic exegesis, creed, and Sufism. Modern fatwas also deal with a wide variety of other topics, including insurance, sex-change operations, moon exploration, beer drinking, abortion in the case of fatal foetal abnormalities, or males and females sharing workplaces. Public \"fatwa wars\" have reflected political controversies in the Muslim world, from anti-colonial struggles to the Gulf War of the 1990s, when muftis in some countries issued fatwas supporting collaboration with the US-led coalition, while muftis from other countries endorsed the Iraqi call for jihad against the US and its collaborators. In the private sphere, some muftis have begun to resemble social workers, giving advice on various personal issues encountered in everyday life.\nThe social profile of the fatwa petitioner has also undergone considerable changes. Owing to the rise of universal education, those who solicit fatwas have become increasingly educated, which has transformed the traditional mufti\u2013mustafti relationship based on restricted literacy. The questioner is now also increasingly likely to be female, and in the modern world Muslim women tend to address muftis directly rather than conveying their query through a male relative as in the past. Since women now represent a significant proportion of students studying Islamic law and qualifying as muftiyas, their prominence in its interpretation is likely to rise. A fatwa hotline in the United Arab Emirates provides access to either male or female muftis, allowing women to request fatwas from female Islamic legal scholars.\nThe vast amount of fatwas produced in the modern world attests to the importance of Islamic authenticity to many Muslims. However, there is little research available to indicate to what extent Muslims acknowledge the authority of various fatwas and heed their rulings in real life. Rather than reflecting the actual conduct or opinions of Muslims, these fatwas may instead represent a collection of opinions on what Muslims \"ought to think\"."}
{"id": "11260", "revid": "64883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11260", "title": "Relax (song)", "text": "\"Relax\" is a song by Frankie Goes to Hollywood, released in the United Kingdom by ZTT Records in 1983 as the Liverpudlian band's debut single. \nThe hit version, produced by Trevor Horn and featuring the band along with other musicians, entered the UK Top 75 singles chart in November 1983 but did not crack the Top 40 until early January 1984. Three weeks later it reached number one, in the chart dated 28 January 1984, replacing Paul McCartney's \"Pipes of Peace\". One of the decade's most controversial and most commercially successful records, \"Relax\" eventually sold a reported two million copies in the UK alone, easily ranking among the ten biggest-selling singles of all time. It remained in the UK Top 40 for 37 consecutive weeks, 35 of which overlapped with a radio airplay ban by the BBC (owing to lyrics perceived as overtly sexual). In June 1984, bolstered by the instant massive success of the band's follow-up single \"Two Tribes\", the single re-entered the Top Ten for a further nine weeks including two spent at number two (behind \"Two Tribes\"). At that time Frankie Goes to Hollywood were the only act apart from the Beatles and John Lennon to occupy the top two positions on the chart. Several different 12-inch single versions fed the \"Relax\" phenomenon. The single re-entered the UK Top 75 in February 1985 and, more successfully, in October 1993 when it spent three weeks in the Top Ten.\nIn the United States \"Relax\" was also comparitively slow in reaching its chart peak. Released in March 1984, albeit with a different mix and nearly a minute shorter in length, the single stalled at no. 67 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot 100 in May during a seven-week run, but it ranked number one for the year on Los Angeles \"alternative rock\" station KROQ, as voted for by listeners. In January 1985, a release of \"Relax\" that was far more similar to the UK hit version entered the Hot 100 at no. 70, and in March reached no. 10 during its 16-week run. In January 1989 the single was certified gold by the RIAA.\nIn February 1985 the record was awarded Best British Single of 1984 at the Brit Awards, and Frankie Goes to Hollywood won Best British Newcomer.\nA version of the song features on Frankie Goes to Hollywood's debut album \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\", released in October 1984.\n\"Relax\" features on the soundtrack of the films \"Body Double\" (1984) and \"T2 Trainspotting\" (2017), in the game ' (2006), in the fictional in-game radio station Wave 103 (2006), and on the soundtrack to the 2018 interactive film '.\nBackground and recording.\nSinger Holly Johnson has claimed that the words of the song came to him as he was walking down Princess Avenue in Liverpool: \"I mean they were just, you know, words that floated into my head one day when I was walking down Princess Avenue with no bus fare, trying to get to rehearsals \u2013 I mean there was no great sort of calculated, 'Oh I'll sing these words and this record\u2019ll be banned'.\"\nZTT Records signed Frankie Goes to Hollywood after producer-turned-ZTT cofounder Trevor Horn saw the band play on the television show \"The Tube\", on which the group played an early version of \"Relax\". Horn described the original version of \"Relax\" as \"More a jingle than a song\", but he preferred to work with songs that were not professionally finished because he could then \"fix them up\" in his own style. Once the band was signed, ZTT co-founder Paul Morley mapped out the marketing campaign fashioned as a \"strategic assault on pop\". Morley opted to tackle the biggest possible themes in the band's singles (\"sex, war, religion\"), of which \"Relax\" would be the first, and emphasized the shock impact of Frankie members Holly Johnson's and Paul Rutherford's open homosexuality in the packaging and music videos.\nHorn dominated the recording of \"Relax\" in his effort for perfectionism. The band were overawed and intimidated by Horn's reputation, and thus were too nervous to make suggestions. Johnson said in his autobiography, \"Whatever he said we went along with\". When attempts to record with the full band proved unsatisfactory, Horn hired former Ian Dury backing band the Blockheads for the sessions, with Norman Watt-Roy providing the original bass line. Those sessions were later deemed to be not modern sounding enough. Horn then constructed a more electronic-based version of the song with keyboards by session musician Andy Richards and with rhythm programming assistance from J. J. Jeczalik of Art of Noise. Horn developed this version of the recording in his west London studio while the band remained in their hometown of Liverpool. Horn had made 3 versions of \"Relax\" prior to Richards and guitarist Stephen Lipson joining his ZTT Production 'Theam' in late 1983. Horn left the studio late one night asking for Lipson to erase the multitrack (of version 3) due to lack of progress, but came back into the studio some time later to hear Richards playing a variety of modal chords based around the key of E minor with Lipson playing guitar along to the unerased multitrack. Ultimately lead vocalist Johnson was the only band member to perform on the record; the only contribution by the other members was a sample crafted from the sound of the rest of the band jumping into a swimming pool. Horn explained years later, \"I was just... Look, 'Relax' \"had\" to be a hit.\" Despite the band's absence from the record, Horn said, \"I could never have done these records in isolation. There was no actual playing by the band, but the whole \"feeling\" came from the band.\" Horn completed the recording having spent \u00a370,000 in studio time.\nRelease, controversy and ban by the BBC.\nMorley intentionally courted scandal with the promotion of \"Relax\". ZTT initiated the ad campaign for \"Relax\" with two quarter-page ads in the British music press. The first ad featured images of Rutherford in a sailor cap and a leather vest, and Johnson with a shaved head and rubber gloves. The images were accompanied by the phrase \"ALL THE NICE BOYS LOVE SEA MEN\", a pun on the music hall song \"All the Nice Girls love a Sailor\". It declared \"Frankie Goes to Hollywood are coming\u00a0... making Duran Duran lick the shit off their shoes\u00a0... Nineteen inches that must be taken always.\" The second ad promised \"theories of bliss, a history of Liverpool from 1963 to 1983, a guide to Amsterdam bars\".\nWhen first released in November 1983, the initial progress of \"Relax\" on the UK Top 75 was sluggish. First charting at number 67, by its seventh week on the chart it had progressed only to number 35, even falling back slightly during that time. But then on Thursday 5 January 1984, Frankie Goes to Hollywood performed \"Relax\" on the BBC flagship television chart show, \"Top of the Pops\". The following week it soared to number 6. On 11 January 1984, Radio 1 disc jockey Mike Read expressed on air his distaste for both the record's suggestive sleeve (designed by Anne Yvonne Gilbert) and its lyrics, which centred on the oft-repeated \"Relax, don't do it/When you want to sock it to it/Relax, don't do it/ When you want to come.\" He announced his refusal to play the record, not knowing that the BBC had just decided that the song was not to be played on the BBC anyway. Holly Johnson contends that the lyrics were misheard - rather than \"When you want to sock it to it\", the lyric is \"When you want to suck, chew it\".\nIn support of their disc jockey, BBC Radio banned the single from its shows a reported two days later (although certain prominent night-time BBC shows\u00a0\u2013 including those of Kid Jensen and John Peel\u00a0\u2013 continued to play the record, as they saw fit, throughout 1984). The now-banned \"Relax\" rose to number 2 in the charts by 17 January, and hit the number-one spot on 24 January. By this time, the BBC Radio ban had extended to \"Top of the Pops\" as well, which displayed a still picture of the group during its climactic Number One announcement, before airing a performance by a non-Number One artist.\nThis went on for the five weeks that \"Relax\" was at number one. It then began a slow decline on the charts, falling back as far as number 31 in May 1984 before returning to number two in July whilst Frankie's follow-up single \"Two Tribes\" held the UK number-one spot. In the end, \"Relax\" remained on the Top 75 for 48 consecutive weeks and returned in February 1985 for four more, giving a total of 52.\nThe ban became an embarrassment for the BBC, especially given that UK commercial radio and television stations were still playing the song. Later in 1984 the ban was lifted and \"Relax\" featured on both the Christmas Day edition of \"Top of the Pops\" and Radio 1's rundown of the best-selling singles of the year.\nThroughout the \"Relax\" controversy, the band continued to publicly deny that the song's lyrics were sexual. Nevertheless, by 1984, it was clear that the public were aware of the sexual nature of the lyrics, but the scandal had fuelled sales anyway. In 1985, with the release of the \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" album (which included \"Relax\"), the band dropped any public pretense about the lyrics: \nThe track was reissued in September 1993, the first of a string of Frankie Goes to Hollywood singles to be reissued that year. It debuted at a high number six on the UK singles chart and peaked at number five the next week. It spent seven weeks on the Top 75 this time, thus extending its combined total to 59, making it the third longest runner of all time (seven other singles have since surpassed it; now it is in joint 10th place).\nOriginal 1983\u20131984 mixes.\nAlthough the 7-inch version of the single remained unchanged throughout its initial release (a mix generally known as \"Relax (Move)\"), promotional 7-inch records featuring a substantially different mix of \"Relax\" (entitled either \"The Last Seven Inches\" or \"Warp Mix\" because it is a compilation of other versions) were the subject of a limited 1984 release.\nThree principal 12-inch remixes of \"Relax\" were eventually created by producer Trevor Horn:\nOne of the reasons we did all the remixes was that the initial 12-inch version of 'Relax' contained something called 'The Sex Mix', which was 16 minutes long and didn't even contain a song. It was really Holly Johnson just jamming, as well as a bunch of samples of the group jumping in the swimming pool and me sort of making disgusting noises by dropping stuff into buckets of water! We got so many complaints about it\u00a0\u2014 particularly from gay clubs, who found it offensive\u00a0\u2014 that we cut it in half and reduced it down to eight minutes, by taking out some of the slightly more offensive parts [this became \"Sex Mix (Edition 2)\"]. Then we got another load of complaints, because the single version wasn't on the 12-inch\u00a0\u2014 I didn't see the point in this at the time, but I was eventually put straight about it.\nHorn attested that visits to New York's Paradise Garage club led to the creation of the final \"Relax (New York Mix)\", which ultimately replaced the original \"Sex Mix\" releases:\nIt was only when I went to this club and heard the sort of things they were playing that I really understood about 12-inch remixes. Although I myself had already had a couple of big 12-inch hits, I'd never heard them being played on a big sound system, and so I then went back and mixed 'Relax' again and that was the version which sold a couple of million over here [in the UK].\nThe original 12-inch version of \"Relax\", labelled \"Sex Mix\", ran for over 16 minutes, and is broadly as described by Horn above. The subsequent \"Edition 2\" was an 8-minute-plus edit of the \"Sex Mix\", and can only be distinguished by having \"12ISZTAS1\" etched on the vinyl. The final 12-inch mix, containing no elements from the foregoing versions, was designated the \"New York Mix\", and ran for approximately 7:20. This was the most commonly available 12-inch version of \"Relax\" during its worldwide 1984 chart success.\nThe UK cassette single featured \"Greatest Bits\", a unique amalgam of excerpts from the \"Sex Mix\", \"New York Mix\", \"Move\" and an instrumental version of \"Move\".\nSince virtually all of the UK \"Relax\" 12-inch singles were labelled \"Sex Mix\", a method of differentiating between versions by reference to the record's matrix numbers necessarily became \"de rigueur\" for collectors of Frankie Goes to Hollywood releases (and ultimately collectors of ZTT records in general).\n\"Relax (Come Fighting)\" was the version of the song included on the \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" album. This is ostensibly a variant of the 7-inch single \"Move\" mix, but is different from that version. For example, the \"7\" mix fades in on a foghorn type sound while the album mix fades in on sustained synth chords. Also, the backing vocals of the 7\" mix are panned to the left, whereas they are mixed in the centre on the album version. Additionally, the 7\" mix features a prominent reverberated kick drum sound during the introduction that also appears in other parts of the song, which is completely absent from the album mix. The album mix also has a certain post-production sheen (greater stereo separation of parts, more strategic uses of reverb, etc.) that is absent from the original 1983 7-inch single mix. The \"Classic 1993 Version\" is a version of the original 7\" mix that uses \"Bonus, Again\" as the instrumental track, although modification with elements from \"Come Fighting\" thrown in (e.g. both the intro and outro come directly from it) and much of it made to sound more clear.\nThe original airing of Relax on \"The Tube\", before the band were signed to ZTT, featured another verse that was edited from all the released versions, \"In heaven everything is fine, you've got yours and I've got mine\", presumably removed as it was taken directly from the David Lynch film \"Eraserhead\".\nAccording to a fan enquiry by a member of the Alternate forum (a forum decided to ZTT) to Holly Johnson over accusation that \"Edition 2\" was created by a DJ, \"Edition 2\" was edited by Trevor Horn at the SARM East studio with JJ Jeczalik as engineer and Holly watching.\nB-sides.\nThe 7-inch featured \"One September Monday\", an interview between ZTT's Paul Morley, Holly Johnson and Paul Rutherford. During the interview, Holly revealed that the group's name derived from a page of the \"New Yorker\" magazine, headlined \"Frankie Goes Hollywood\" and featuring Frank Sinatra \"getting mobbed by teenyboppers\".\nOn all of the original 12-inch releases, the B-side featured a cover of \"Ferry 'Cross the Mersey\", followed by a brief dialogue involving Rutherford attempting to sign on, and an a cappella version of the title track's chorus, segueing into an instrumental version of \"Relax\", known as \"Bonus, Again\" (which resembles \"Come Fighting\" more than the 7\" mix).\nThe UK cassette single included \"Ferry 'Cross the Mersey\" and interview sections not included on \"One September Monday\".\nVideos.\nThe first official video for \"Relax\", directed by Bernard Rose and set in an S&amp;M themed gay nightclub, featuring the bandmembers accosted by buff leathermen, a glamorous drag queen, and an obese admirer dressed up as a Roman emperor, played by actor John Dair, was allegedly banned by MTV and the BBC, prompting the recording of a second video, directed by Godley and Creme in early 1984, featuring the group performing with the help of laser beams. However, after the second video was made the song was banned completely by the BBC, meaning that neither video was ever broadcast on any BBC music programmes.\nA live performance video of the song was directed by David Mallet, making the rounds at MTV.\nAnother MTV video of the studio version includes footage from the Brian De Palma film \"Body Double\". \"Body Double\", a popular 1984 erotic thriller film, contains a film within a film sequence in which Frankie Goes to Hollywood performs \"Relax\" on the set of a porn film.\nRe-issues.\nThe title track has periodically been reissued as a single in a number of remix forms."}
{"id": "11261", "revid": "1009957330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11261", "title": "Two Tribes", "text": "\"Two Tribes\" is an anti-war song by British band Frankie Goes to Hollywood, released in the UK by ZTT Records on 4 June 1984. The song was later included on the album \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\". Presenting a nihilistic, gleeful lyric expressing enthusiasm for nuclear war, it juxtaposes a relentless pounding bass line and guitar riff inspired by American funk and R&amp;B pop with influences of Russian classical music, in an opulent arrangement produced by Trevor Horn.\nThe single was a phenomenal success in the UK, helped by a wide range of remixes and supported by an advertising campaign depicting the band as members of the Red Army. It entered the charts at number one on 10 June 1984 and stayed at the top of the UK Singles Chart for nine consecutive weeks, during which time the group's previous single \"Relax\" climbed back up the charts to number two. It was the longest-running number-one single in the UK of the 1980s. It has sold 1.58 million copies in the UK as of November 2012. Songwriters Johnson, Gill and O'Toole received the 1984 Ivor Novello award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically. In 2015 the song was voted by the British public as the nation's 14th-favourite 1980s number one in a poll for ITV.\nMusic.\nA version of \"Two Tribes\" was originally recorded for a BBC John Peel session in October 1982. The session version makes clear that the basic structure of the song, including its signature bass-line, percussion arrangement and idiosyncratic introductory and middle eight sections, were already intact prior to any involvement from ZTT or eventual producer Trevor Horn.\nJohnson also noted: \"There's two elements in the music \u2013 an American funk line and a Russian line. It's the most obvious demonstration of two tribes that we have today.\" To accentuate the musical tension, Horn arranged the 'Russian' segments as a dramatic string arrangement. The driving funk/rock rhythm section was played on synthesisers.\nTitle and lyrics.\nThe single was released at a time when the Cold War had intensified and fears about global nuclear warfare were at a peak. Although Johnson would attest in a 1984 radio interview that the \"two tribes\" of the song potentially represented any pair of warring adversaries (giving the examples of \"cowboys and Indians or Captain Kirk and Klingons\"), the line \"On the air America/I modelled shirts by Van Heusen\" is a clear reference to then US President Ronald Reagan. Reagan had advertised for Phillips Van Heusen in 1953 (briefly reviving the association in the early 1980s). The title of his first film had been \"Love Is on the Air\".\nThe lyric \"working for the black gas\" is, according to Johnson, \"About oil surpassing gold. How you might as well be paid in petrol.\" And the line \"Are we living in a land where sex and horror are the new gods?\" was inspired by the 1959 British film \"Cover Girl Killer\". Johnson explained, \"The TV was on in the background while I was doing me ironing and suddenly this character came out with that statement.\" (The actual dialogue, which occurs at about 48 minutes 24 seconds into the film, is \"Surely sex and horror are the new gods in this polluted world of so-called entertainment?\")\nThe track featured snippets of narration from actor Patrick Allen, recreating his narration from the British \"Protect and Survive\" public information films about how to survive a nuclear war. (The original \"Protect and Survive\" soundtracks were sampled for the 7-inch mixes.)\nThe 12-inch A- and B-sides featured voice parts by British actor Chris Barrie imitating Ronald Reagan. Barrie also voiced the Reagan puppet on \"Spitting Image\". Barrie's parts as 'Reagan' included praise for the band, as well as parts of Adolf Hitler's speech to a court after the Beer Hall Putsch: \"You may pronounce us guilty a thousand times over, but the Goddess of the Eternal Court of History will smile and tear to tatters the brief of the State Prosecutor and the sentence of this court, for She acquits us.\" Barrie also voiced the last sentence of \"History Will Absolve Me\" (Spanish: \"La historia me absolver\u00e1\") which is the concluding sentence and subsequent title of a four-hour speech made by Fidel Castro on 16 October 1953. Castro made the speech in his own defense in court against the charges brought against him after leading an attack on the Moncada Barracks on 26 July 1953. Barrie would return for the band's next single, \"The Power of Love\", imitating Mike Read in a parody of the DJ's ban on their previous single, \"Relax\".\nThe song's title derives from the line \"two mighty warrior tribes went to war\" from the film \"Mad Max 2\" (the line is also spoken by Holly Johnson at the beginning of the session version).\nPromotion.\nZTT aggressively marketed the single in terms of its topical political angle, promoting it with images of the group wearing American military garb in combat, as well as Soviet-style army uniforms set against an American urban backdrop.\nThe original cover art featured a Soviet mural of Vladimir Lenin in St Petersburg, and images of Reagan and then-UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The sleeve notes, attributed to ZTT's Paul Morley, dispassionately reported details of the relative nuclear arsenals of each superpower.\nOriginal 1984 mixes.\nThe song appeared in the form of six mixes, including \"Annihilation\", \"Carnage\", \"Hibakusha\", \"Cowboys and Indians\", \"We Don't Want to Die\" and \"For The Victims of Ravishment\".\nThe first 12-inch mix (\"Annihilation\") started with an air-raid siren, and included advice from Allen about how to tag and dispose of family members should they die in the fallout shelter (taken from the public information film \"Casualties\"). This version appeared on CD editions of the album. \"Annihilation\" was the basis for the \"Hibakusha\" mix, which was originally released in a limited edition, and appears on the Japanese-only 1985 album \"Bang!\".\n\"For The Victims of Ravishment\" appeared on the LP and cassette editions of the album \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\". It is the shortest version, at 3:27 minutes. This mix derived from the \"Carnage\" mix, which prominently featured strings as well as vocal samples from Allen and the group's B-side interview.\nSince 1984, \"Two Tribes\" has been re-issued several times, generally involving third-party remixes bearing little relation to the original releases in terms of either structure or character.\nB-sides.\nThe 7-inch featured \"One February Friday\", an interview between Morley and the group's three musicians, Mark O'Toole, Brian Nash and Peter Gill, over an otherwise untitled instrumental track. A similar track had been included on the B-side of \"Relax\", with the title \"One September Monday\".\nThe principal B-side to the original 12-inch single was a cover version of \"War\", which became the subject of an extended remix (subtitled \"Hidden\") on the single's third UK 12-inch release, where it was promoted as a double A-side with \"Carnage\".\nThe UK cassette single featured a cut-together combination of \"Surrender\", \"Carnage\" and \"Annihilation\", plus Reagan snippets and interview sections not included on any other release.\nVideos.\nThe Godley &amp; Creme-directed video depicted a wrestling match between then-US President Ronald Reagan and Konstantin Chernenko, then Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in front of group members and an assembly of representatives from the world's nations. The match eventually degenerates into global destruction. Certain violent moments (\"Reagan\" is seen, for example, biting \"Chernenko's\" ear) were edited from the version shown on MTV.\nA longer version of the video (based on the \"Hibakusha\" mix) included an introductory, heavily edited monologue by Richard Nixon taken from an ad from his 1960 US Presidential campaign (\"No\u00a0... firm diplomacy\u00a0... No\u00a0... peace for America and the world\"), plus similar contributions from other world leaders, including Lord Beaverbrook, Yasser Arafat and John F. Kennedy. The complete soundtrack to the extended video was eventually released as \"Two Tribes (Video Destructo)\" on the German version of the \"Twelve Inches\" compilation. A third version of the video, included on the band's \"From An Wasteland to an Artificial Paradise\" VHS, retains the introduction, but omits most of the inserted clips in the main wrestling sequence.\nTrack listing.\nAll discographical information pertains to the original UK single release only.\n7\": ZTT / ZTAS 3 United Kingdom.\nThe A-side mix is commonly referred as \"Cowboys and Indians\" to avoid confusion with other mixes, as ZTT commonly gives the sides on singles separate names. Thus, \"One February Friday\" is sometimes subtitled as either \"Doctors and Nurses\" (as per the regular 7\") or \"Only Bullets Can Stop Them Now\" (as per the picture disc B-side label).\n7\" (picture disc): ZTT / P ZTAS 3 United Kingdom.\nThe A-side is an alternative mix to the regular 7\" (subtitled \"We Don't Want To Die\" on the B-side label). A common theory within many fans is that \"We Don't Want To Die\" is essentially \"Surrender\" with vocals.\nAlso issued as a regular 7\" in Canada.\n12\": Island Records / X-14065 Australia.\n\"Extended Version\" is the same as \"Annihilation\".\n\"Two Tribes\" on the B-side is the 7\" picture disc mix.\n12\": ZTT / XZTAS 3DJ United Kingdom.\n\"New York Mix\" was mislabeled as \"U.S mix\".\nMC: ZTT / CTIS 103 United Kingdom.\n\"Keep The Peace\" is a combination of Surrender, Carnage and Annihilation.\n2014 Digital Download #1: Two Tribes.\n\"Hibakush-ah!\" is an early version of \"Hibakusha\"."}
{"id": "11262", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11262", "title": "The Power of Love", "text": "The Power of Love or Power of Love may refer to:"}
{"id": "11263", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11263", "title": "Welcome to the Pleasuredome (song)", "text": "\"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" is the title track to the 1984 debut album by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. The lyrics of the song were inspired by the poem \"Kubla Khan\" by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.\nIn March 1985, the album track was abridged and remixed for release as the group's fourth UK single.\nWhile criticized at the time of release and afterward for being a song that glorifies debauchery, the lyrics (and video), just as Coleridge's poem, were about the \"dangers\" of this kind of lifestyle. This song, along with \"Relax\", made Frankie Goes to Hollywood even more controversial than they already were.\nOriginal 1985 single.\nDespite the group's record label (ZTT) pre-emptively promoting the single as \"their fourth number one\", an achievement that would have set a new UK record for consecutive number one singles by a debuting artist, \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" peaked at number two in the UK singles chart, being kept off the top spot by the Phil Collins/Philip Bailey duet \"Easy Lover\". The single spent a total of eleven weeks on the UK chart.\nIt was the first release by the group not to reach number one and, despite representing a creditable success in its own right, it symbolically confirmed the end of the chart invincibility that the group had enjoyed during 1984. Frankie Goes to Hollywood would not release another record for seventeen months, and they would fail to emulate their past chart success upon their return.\nThe spoken-word introductions to both 12-inch mixes are adapted from Walter Kaufmann's 1967 translation of Friedrich Nietzsche's \"The Birth of Tragedy\". The recitation on the first 12-inch (\"Real Altered\") is by Gary Taylor, whilst that on the second 12-inch (\"Fruitness\") and the cassette is by actor Geoffrey Palmer. It is unknown whether Palmer's concluding \"Welcome To The Pleasured\"r\"ome\" was a genuine mistake or a deliberately scripted one.\nThis is the only single from the group that was not released on a CD single at that time, the other being \"Watching The Wildlife\". \"Relax\", \"Two Tribes\", \"The Power of Love\" and \"Rage Hard+\" all saw a CD-maxi release in Germany at the end of the '80s. \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" was not given such a release. However, the 7\" vinyl single was released in two different mixes, and it was purely random as to which one you ended up with, as both mixes were in identical sleeve designs and carried the same catalogue number. Not only that, but the subtitle used to identify different mixes was identical on both record labels, with only the matrix number on the run out groove giving the game away. The first 7\" (matrix 7 A 1 U) carried the normal 7\" single mix, which was guitar driven. However, the \"secret\" alternative mix (matrix 7 A 7 U or 7 A 8 U) was quite different, and featured on the Apple shaped Picture Disc. The subtitle for that disc was 'alternative reel' but on the 7\" single the subtitle remained unchanged as 'altered real'. \nIn fact, although appearing to be identical sleeves, the two mixes were actually released in slightly different ones. The standard 7\" mix came in a thick paper sleeve, whereas the \"secret\" one came in a thin paper sleeve.\nB-sides.\nAll releases featured an edited version of \"Get It On\", originally recorded for a BBC Radio 1 session in 1983 (a full-length version was included on the cassette release), plus a faded or full length version of \"Happy Hi!\", a non-album track.\nBoth \"Relax (International)\" and \"Born To Run\" are live recordings (with some minor overdubs), based on an actual live appearance on \"The Tube's\" \"Europe A-Go-Go\" in Newcastle during early January 1985.\nVideo.\nThe video, by Bernard Rose, features the group stealing a car whilst Holly is flying in a helicopter chasing them, going to a carnival and encountering all manner of deceptively \"pleasureable\" activities. The audio soundtrack of the video was included as part of the cassette single.\nThree edits were made, the regular 4:55 version with the regular 7\" mix, a 5:45 version matching what was included on the cassette single and a 7:52 version with a longer, different intro.\nPromotional releases.\nIn 1984, a few months prior to the album's release, an early instrumental version of the album track was issued as a promotional 12-inch single, entitled \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome (Pleasure Fix)\", along with a similar early instrumental of \"The Only Star in Heaven\" (subtitled \"Star Fix\"). These tracks were subsequently given wider release as part of the B-side to the second 12-inch of \"The Power of Love\" single.\n\"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" was also used on several promotional records in the USA during 1985, featuring the following tracks in various combinations:\nReissues.\nThe track has periodically been reissued as a single, including during 1993 and 2000. Although these releases have some admirers, and have usefully made available various original mixes on CD for the first time, the accompanying A-side remixes by contemporary DJs have tended on the whole to bear little or no comparison to the spirit of the originals.\nReissues in the group's name have also tended to shun any overt reference to the identity of the original artists, and the reissue artwork has notably featured no images of the group. It has been suggested that this situation may relate to Johnson's successful but acrimonious court case against ZTT in 1989, which freed him (and effectively the other group members) from their unfair contract with the label.\n1993 reissues\nCD: ZTT / FGTH2CD United Kingdom.\nTrack 4 is mislabeled. It's the \"Real Altered\" version from 12 ZTAS 7.\n12\": ZTT / FGTH2T United Kingdom.\n2000 reissues\n12\": ZTT / ZTT 166 TPX United Kingdom.\n2014 reissues\nOther versions.\nThe instrumental \"Into Battle Mix\" appears on the soundtrack to the film \"Toys\", specifically utilized whenever the Tommy Tanks appeared."}
{"id": "11264", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11264", "title": "Rage Hard", "text": "\"Rage Hard\" is the fifth single by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. It was released on 25 August 1986.\nBackground.\nHaving topped the charts around the world with \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" and its accompanying singles, Frankie Goes to Hollywood took off to Amsterdam to record the follow-up album, \"Liverpool\". Taking on a rockier edge, \"Rage Hard\" was the first single culled from the disc.\nOf note, \"Rage Hard\" was a testament to the changing musical landscape in Britain at the time. It was not only the first Frankie single to be featured on CD single, it was also the first single to not feature a cassette release - new rules limited the number of items that could count towards the official charts, following the earlier ZTT excesses.\n\"Rage Hard\" eventually hit Number 4 in the UK singles charts and Number 1 in Germany (for two weeks), #5 in Switzerland, #7 in the Netherlands, #12 in Austria, #19 in Sweden and #32 in France.\nB-sides.\nThe B-sides to \"Rage Hard\" were, for the most part, straight forward cover songs. Firstly there was a cover of David Bowie's 1972 glam-rock classic \"Suffragette City\", slightly renamed to \"SuffRAGEtte City\" to fit in with the \"Rage Hard\" promotion. The second cover song was \"Roadhouse Blues\" by The Doors which featured on the 2nd 12\". A shorter version features on the CD single.\nThe original B-side is an odd composition entitled \"(Don't Lose What's Left) Of Your Little Mind\". It was released in two versions, a 4-minute mix and a 6-minute mix and featured Holly Johnson &amp; Brian (Nasher) Nash imitating Count von Count (\"Ha ha ha/I am the Count\") from the children's TV show \"Sesame Street\". This was complemented by sampled burps and belches over a backing track.\nTrack listing.\n7\": ZTT / ZTAS 22 United Kingdom.\n\"rage rage\"\n7\": ZTT / ZTAX 22 United Kingdom.\n (All discographical information pertains to UK releases only)\n12\": ZTT / 12 ZTAS 22 United Kingdom.\n\"Slam Bam\"\nCD: ZTT / CD ZCID 22 United Kingdom.\nTracks 1 and 3.1 was rereleased in 2012 on CD Sexmix Disk 1, Tracks 14 and 15.\n1993 Version.\nIn 1993, a version of the song appeared on the b side of The Power Of Love reissue (FGTH 3) entitled \"Original DJ mix\". This version is the original 7\" mix from 1986, but with the first chorus removed. Instead, the first verse and second verse are jointed together. This release can also be found on a large centre hole 7\" disc with the label details stamped into the naked vinyl, as opposed to a paper or printed label."}
{"id": "11267", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11267", "title": "Liverpool (album)", "text": "Liverpool is Frankie Goes to Hollywood's second and final studio album, released in October 1986. It would be the band's final album of all-new material, and lead singer Holly Johnson would leave the band following the corresponding world tour, followed by a flurry of lawsuits from ZTT. The album's production was handled by Trevor Horn's engineer Stephen Lipson, who urged the band to play their own instruments on this album (Horn having replaced many of the band's performances and arrangements with his session musicians or his own performances on \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\"). \"Liverpool\" therefore features a heavier rock sound than its predecessor.\nThe album was a commercial disappointment compared to the band's previous effort, though it charted generally high at No. 5 in the United Kingdom and Germany, No. 7 on the Austrian and Swiss music charts and No. 8 in Norway. The cover photo was different depending on what format was purchased (LP, cassette, or compact disc). It also produced the top 5 single \"Rage Hard\" (No. 1 in Germany), top 20 single \"Warriors of the Wasteland\" and top 30 single \"Watching the Wildlife\".\nTrack listing.\nAll songs Gill/Johnson/Nash/O'Toole unless otherwise stated.\nThe 2000 German reissues includes two bonus tracks:\nDeluxe edition.\nIn 2011, a remastered deluxe edition of \"Liverpool\" was released, featuring a second disc containing rare and previously unreleased material. The first CD contains the LP version of the original album with extra tracks and the second CD rare and unreleased tracks. A few tracks were removed off later issues due to complainants by the band members. Issues with those tracks are \"number 15 in the Element Series\", and those without are \"number 19 in the Element Series\".\nCD1\nCD2\nPersonnel.\nAdditional personnel"}
{"id": "11272", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11272", "title": "Free State Danzig", "text": ""}
{"id": "11273", "revid": "47947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11273", "title": "Faroese language", "text": "Faroese ( or ; , ) is a North Germanic language spoken as a first language by about 72,000 Faroe Islanders, around 49,000 of whom reside on the Faroe Islands and 23,000 in other areas, mainly Denmark. \nIt is one of five languages descended from Old West Norse spoken in the Middle Ages, the others being Norwegian, Icelandic, and the extinct Norn and Greenlandic Norse. Faroese and Icelandic, its closest extant relative, are not mutually intelligible in speech, but the written languages resemble each other quite closely, largely owing to Faroese's etymological orthography.\nHistory.\nAround 900, the language spoken in the Faroes was Old Norse, which Norse settlers had brought with them during the time of the settlement of Faroe Islands () that began in 825. However, many of the settlers were not from Scandinavia, but descendants of Norse settlers in the Irish Sea region. In addition, women from Norse Ireland, Orkney, or Shetland often married native Scandinavian men before settling in the Faroe Islands and Iceland. As a result, the Irish language has had some influence on both Faroese and Icelandic. \nThere is some debatable evidence of Irish language place names in the Faroes: for example, the names of Mykines, St\u00f3ra D\u00edmun, L\u00edtla D\u00edmun and Argir have been hypothesized to contain Celtic roots. Other examples of early-introduced words of Celtic origin are: / (buttermilk), cf. Middle Irish ; (tail-piece of an animal), cf. Middle Irish ; (head, headhair), cf. Middle Irish ; (hand, paw), cf. Middle Irish ; (bull), cf. Middle Irish ; and (pasture in the outfield), cf. Middle Irish .\nBetween the 9th and the 15th centuries, a distinct Faroese language evolved, although it was probably still mutually intelligible with Old West Norse, and remained similar to the Norn language of Orkney and Shetland during Norn's earlier phase.\nFaroese ceased to be a written language after the union of Norway with Denmark in 1380, with Danish replacing Faroese as the language of administration and education. The islanders continued to use the language in ballads, folktales, and everyday life. This maintained a rich spoken tradition, but for 300 years the language was not used in written form.\nIn 1823, the Danish Bible Society published a diglot of the Gospel of Matthew, with Faroese on the left and Danish on the right.\nVenceslaus Ulricus Hammershaimb and the Icelandic grammarian and politician J\u00f3n Sigur\u00f0sson published a written standard for Modern Faroese in 1854, which still exists. They set a standard for the orthography of the language, based on its Old Norse roots and similar to that of Icelandic. The main purpose of this was for the spelling to represent the diverse dialects of Faroese in equal measure. Additionally, it had the advantages of being etymologically clear and keeping the kinship with the Icelandic written language. The actual pronunciation, however, often differs considerably from the written rendering. The letter \"\u00f0\", for example, has no specific phoneme attached to it.\nJakob Jakobsen devised a rival system of orthography, based on his wish for a phonetic spelling, but this system was never taken up by the speakers.\nIn 1908, Scripture Gift Mission published the Gospel of John in Faroese.\nIn 1937, Faroese replaced Danish as the official school language, in 1938, as the church language, and in 1948, as the national language by the Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands. However, Faroese did not become the common language of media and advertising until the 1980s. Today, Danish is considered a foreign language, although around 5% of residents on the Faroes learn it as a first language, and it is taught in school from the first grade.\nIn 2017, the tourist board Visit Faroe Islands launched the Faroe Islands Translate, available in 13 languages including English, Chinese, Russian, Japanese, and Portuguese.\nOld Faroese.\nOld Faroese (, ca. mid-14th to mid-16th centuries) is a form of Old Norse spoken in medieval times in the Faroe Islands. The most crucial aspects of the development of Faroese are diphthongisation and palatalisation.\nThere is not enough data available to establish an accurate chronology of Faroese, but a rough one may be developed through comparison to the chronologies of Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian. In the 12th/13th centuries, \"\u00e1\" and \"\u01eb\u0301\" merged as ; later on at the beginning of the 14th century, delabialization took place: \"y\", \"\u00f8y\", \"au\" &gt; ; \"\u00ed\" and \"\u00fd\" merged in addition to \"i\" and \"y\", but in the case of \"\u00ed\" and \"\u00fd\", it appears that labialisation took place instead as is documented by later development to . Further, the language underwent a palatalisation of \"k\", \"g\" and \"sk\" before Old Norse \"e\", \"i\", \"y\", \"\u00f8\", \"au\" &gt; &gt; &gt; . Before the palatalisation \"\u00e9\" and \"\u01fd\" merged as and approximately in the same period epenthetic \"u\" is inserted into word-final and clusters. \nA massive quantity shift also operated in Middle Faroese. In the case of \"skerping\", it took place after delabialization but before loss of post-vocalic \"\u00f0\" and \"g\" . The shift of \"hv\" to , the deletion of in (remaining) word-initial \u2013sonorant clusters (\"hr\", \"hl\", \"hn\" &gt; \"r\", \"l\", \"n\"), and the dissolution of \"\u00fe\" (\"\u00fe\" &gt; \"t\"; \"\u00fe\" &gt; \"h\" in demonstrative pronouns and adverbs) appeared before the end of the 13th century. Another undated change is the merger of \"\u01eb\", \"\u00f8\" and \"\u01ff\" into ; pre-nasal \"\u01eb\", \"\u01eb\u0301\" &gt; \"o\", \"\u00f3\". \"enk\", \"eng\" probably became , in the 14th century; the development of \"a\" to before \"ng\", \"nk\" appeared after the palatalisation of \"k\", \"g\", and \"sk\" had been completed, such a change is quite a recent development, as well as change \"Cve\" &gt; \"Cv\u00f8\".\nAlphabet.\nThe Faroese alphabet consists of 29 letters derived from the Latin script:\nPhonology.\nAs with most other Germanic languages, Faroese has a large number of vowels, with 26 in total. Vowel distribution is similar to other North Germanic languages in that short vowels appear in closed syllables (those ending in consonant clusters or long consonants) and long vowels appearing in open syllables.\nFaroese shares with Icelandic and Danish the feature of maintaining a contrast between stops based exclusively on aspiration, not voicing. Geminated stops may be pre-aspirated in intervocalic and word-final position. Intervocalically the aspirated consonants become pre-aspirated unless followed by a closed vowel. In clusters, the preaspiration merges with a preceding nasal or apical approximant, rendering them voiceless.\nThere are several phonological processes involved in Faroese, including:\nGrammar.\nFaroese grammar is related and very similar to that of modern Icelandic and Old Norse. Faroese is an inflected language with three grammatical genders and four cases: nominative, accusative, dative and genitive."}
{"id": "11274", "revid": "19550900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11274", "title": "Elementary particle", "text": "In particle physics, an elementary particle or fundamental particle is a with no substructure, i.e. it is not composed of other particles. Particles currently thought to be elementary include the fundamental fermions (quarks, leptons, antiquarks, and antileptons), which generally are \"matter particles\" and \"antimatter particles\", as well as the fundamental bosons (gauge bosons and the Higgs boson), which generally are \"force particles\" that mediate interactions among fermions. A particle containing two or more elementary particles is called a \"composite particle\".\nOrdinary matter is composed of atoms, once presumed to be elementary particles\u2014\"atomos\" meaning \"unable to be cut\" in Greek\u2014although the atom's existence remained controversial until about 1905, as some leading physicists regarded molecules as mathematical illusions, and matter as ultimately composed of energy. Subatomic constituents of the atom were first identified in the early 1930s; the electron and the proton, along with the photon, the particle of electromagnetic radiation. At that time, the recent advent of quantum mechanics was radically altering the conception of particles, as a single particle could seemingly span a field as would a wave, a paradox still eluding satisfactory explanation.\nVia quantum theory, protons and neutrons were found to contain quarks \u2013 up quarks and down quarks \u2013 now considered elementary particles. And within a molecule, the electron's three degrees of freedom (charge, spin, orbital) can separate via the wavefunction into three quasiparticles (holon, spinon, and orbiton). Yet a free electron \u2013 one which is \"not\" orbiting an atomic nucleus and hence lacks orbital motion \u2013 appears unsplittable and remains regarded as an elementary particle.\nAround 1980, an elementary particle's status as indeed elementary \u2013 an \"ultimate constituent\" of substance \u2013 was mostly discarded for a more practical outlook, embodied in particle physics' Standard Model, what's known as science's most experimentally successful theory. Many elaborations upon and theories beyond the Standard Model, including the popular supersymmetry, double the number of elementary particles by hypothesizing that each known particle associates with a \"shadow\" partner far more massive, although all such superpartners remain undiscovered. Meanwhile, an elementary boson mediating gravitation \u2013 the graviton \u2013 remains hypothetical. Also, as hypotheses indicate, spacetime is probably quantized, so there most likely exist \"atoms\" of space and time itself.\nOverview.\nAll elementary particles are either bosons or fermions. These classes are distinguished by their quantum statistics: fermions obey Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics and bosons obey Bose\u2013Einstein statistics. Their spin is differentiated via the spin\u2013statistics theorem: it is half-integer for fermions, and integer for bosons.\nIn the Standard Model, elementary particles are represented for predictive utility as point particles. Though extremely successful, the Standard Model is limited to the microcosm by its omission of gravitation and has some parameters arbitrarily added but unexplained.\nCosmic abundance of elementary particles.\nAccording to the current models of big bang nucleosynthesis, the primordial composition of visible matter of the universe should be about 75% hydrogen and 25% helium-4 (in mass). Neutrons are made up of one up and two down quarks, while protons are made of two up and one down quark. Since the other common elementary particles (such as electrons, neutrinos, or weak bosons) are so light or so rare when compared to atomic nuclei, we can neglect their mass contribution to the observable universe's total mass. Therefore, one can conclude that most of the visible mass of the universe consists of protons and neutrons, which, like all baryons, in turn consist of up quarks and down quarks.\nSome estimates imply that there are roughly baryons (almost entirely protons and neutrons) in the observable universe.\nThe number of protons in the observable universe is called the Eddington number.\nIn terms of number of particles, some estimates imply that nearly all the matter, excluding dark matter, occurs in neutrinos, which constitute the majority of the roughly elementary particles of matter that exist in the visible universe. Other estimates imply that roughly elementary particles exist in the visible universe (not including dark matter), mostly photons and other massless force carriers.\nStandard Model.\nThe Standard Model of particle physics contains 12 flavors of elementary fermions, plus their corresponding antiparticles, as well as elementary bosons that mediate the forces and the Higgs boson, which was reported on July 4, 2012, as having been likely detected by the two main experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (ATLAS and CMS). However, the Standard Model is widely considered to be a provisional theory rather than a truly fundamental one, since it is not known if it is compatible with Einstein's general relativity. There may be hypothetical elementary particles not described by the Standard Model, such as the graviton, the particle that would carry the gravitational force, and sparticles, supersymmetric partners of the ordinary particles.\nFundamental fermions.\nThe 12\u00a0fundamental fermions are divided into 3\u00a0generations of 4\u00a0particles each. Half of the fermions are leptons, three of which have an electric charge of \u22121, called the electron (), the muon (), and the tau (); the other three leptons are neutrinos (, , ), which are the only elementary fermions with neither electric nor color charge. The remaining six particles are quarks (discussed below).\nMass.\nThe following table lists current measured masses and mass estimates for all the fermions, using the same scale of measure: millions of electron-volts relative to square of light speed (MeV/c2). For example, the most accurately known quark mass is of the top quark () at 172.7\u00a0GeV/c2 or 172\u00a0700\u00a0MeV/c2, estimated using the On-shell scheme.\nEstimates of the values of quark masses depend on the version of quantum chromodynamics used to describe quark interactions. Quarks are always confined in an envelope of gluons which confer vastly greater mass to the mesons and baryons where quarks occur, so values for quark masses cannot be measured directly. Since their masses are so small compared to the effective mass of the surrounding gluons, slight differences in the calculation make large differences in the masses.\nAntiparticles.\nThere are also 12\u00a0fundamental fermionic antiparticles that correspond to these 12\u00a0particles. For example, the antielectron (positron) \"\" is the electron's antiparticle and has an electric charge of +1.\nQuarks.\nIsolated quarks and antiquarks have never been detected, a fact explained by confinement. Every quark carries one of three color charges of the strong interaction; antiquarks similarly carry anticolor. Color-charged particles interact via gluon exchange in the same way that charged particles interact via photon exchange. However, gluons are themselves color-charged, resulting in an amplification of the strong force as color-charged particles are separated. Unlike the electromagnetic force, which diminishes as charged particles separate, color-charged particles feel increasing force.\nHowever, color-charged particles may combine to form color neutral composite particles called hadrons. A quark may pair up with an antiquark: the quark has a color and the antiquark has the corresponding anticolor. The color and anticolor cancel out, forming a color neutral meson. Alternatively, three quarks can exist together, one quark being \"red\", another \"blue\", another \"green\". These three colored quarks together form a color-neutral baryon. Symmetrically, three antiquarks with the colors \"antired\", \"antiblue\" and \"antigreen\" can form a color-neutral antibaryon.\nQuarks also carry fractional electric charges, but, since they are confined within hadrons whose charges are all integral, fractional charges have never been isolated. Note that quarks have electric charges of either + or \u2212, whereas antiquarks have corresponding electric charges of either \u2212 or +.\nEvidence for the existence of quarks comes from deep inelastic scattering: firing electrons at nuclei to determine the distribution of charge within nucleons (which are baryons). If the charge is uniform, the electric field around the proton should be uniform and the electron should scatter elastically. Low-energy electrons do scatter in this way, but, above a particular energy, the protons deflect some electrons through large angles. The recoiling electron has much less energy and a jet of particles is emitted. This inelastic scattering suggests that the charge in the proton is not uniform but split among smaller charged particles: quarks.\nFundamental bosons.\nIn the Standard Model, vector (spin-1) bosons (gluons, photons, and the W and Z bosons) mediate forces, whereas the Higgs boson (spin-0) is responsible for the intrinsic mass of particles. Bosons differ from fermions in the fact that multiple bosons can occupy the same quantum state (Pauli exclusion principle). Also, bosons can be either elementary, like photons, or a combination, like mesons. The spin of bosons are integers instead of half integers.\nGluons.\nGluons mediate the strong interaction, which join quarks and thereby form hadrons, which are either baryons (three quarks) or mesons (one quark and one antiquark). Protons and neutrons are baryons, joined by gluons to form the atomic nucleus. Like quarks, gluons exhibit color and anticolor \u2013 unrelated to the concept of visual color and rather the particles' strong interactions \u2013 sometimes in combinations, altogether eight variations of gluons.\nElectroweak bosons.\nThere are three weak gauge bosons: W+, W\u2212, and Z0; these mediate the weak interaction. The W\u00a0bosons are known for their mediation in nuclear decay: The W\u2212 converts a neutron into a proton then decays into an electron and electron-antineutrino pair.\nThe Z0 does not convert particle flavor or charges, but rather changes momentum; it is the only mechanism for elastically scattering neutrinos. The weak gauge bosons were discovered due to momentum change in electrons from neutrino-Z exchange. The massless photon mediates the electromagnetic interaction. These four gauge bosons form the electroweak interaction among elementary particles.\nHiggs boson.\nAlthough the weak and electromagnetic forces appear quite different to us at everyday energies, the two forces are theorized to unify as a single electroweak force at high energies. This prediction was clearly confirmed by measurements of cross-sections for high-energy electron-proton scattering at the HERA collider at DESY. The differences at low energies is a consequence of the high masses of the W and Z bosons, which in turn are a consequence of the Higgs mechanism. Through the process of spontaneous symmetry breaking, the Higgs selects a special direction in electroweak space that causes three electroweak particles to become very heavy (the weak bosons) and one to remain with an undefined rest mass as it is always in motion (the photon). On 4 July 2012, after many years of experimentally searching for evidence of its existence, the Higgs boson was announced to have been observed at CERN's Large Hadron Collider. Peter Higgs who first posited the existence of the Higgs boson was present at the announcement. The Higgs boson is believed to have a mass of approximately 125\u00a0GeV. The statistical significance of this discovery was reported as 5\u00a0sigma, which implies a certainty of roughly 99.99994%. In particle physics, this is the level of significance required to officially label experimental observations as a discovery. Research into the properties of the newly discovered particle continues.\nGraviton.\nThe graviton is a hypothetical elementary spin-2 particle proposed to mediate gravitation. While it remains undiscovered due to the difficulty inherent in its detection, it is sometimes included in tables of elementary particles. The conventional graviton is massless, although there exist models containing massive Kaluza\u2013Klein gravitons.\nBeyond the Standard Model.\nAlthough experimental evidence overwhelmingly confirms the predictions derived from the Standard Model, some of its parameters were added arbitrarily, not determined by a particular explanation, which remain mysterious, for instance the hierarchy problem. Theories beyond the Standard Model attempt to resolve these shortcomings.\nGrand unification.\nOne extension of the Standard Model attempts to combine the electroweak interaction with the strong interaction into a single 'grand unified theory' (GUT). Such a force would be spontaneously broken into the three forces by a Higgs-like mechanism. This breakdown is theorized to occur at high energies, making it difficult to observe unification in a laboratory. The most dramatic prediction of grand unification is the existence of X and Y bosons, which cause proton decay. However, the non-observation of proton decay at the Super-Kamiokande neutrino observatory rules out the simplest GUTs, including SU(5) and SO(10).\nSupersymmetry.\nSupersymmetry extends the Standard Model by adding another class of symmetries to the Lagrangian. These symmetries exchange fermionic particles with bosonic ones. Such a symmetry predicts the existence of supersymmetric particles, abbreviated as \"sparticles\", which include the sleptons, squarks, neutralinos, and charginos. Each particle in the Standard Model would have a superpartner whose spin differs by from the ordinary particle. Due to the breaking of supersymmetry, the sparticles are much heavier than their ordinary counterparts; they are so heavy that existing particle colliders would not be powerful enough to produce them. However, some physicists believe that sparticles will be detected by the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.\nString theory.\nString theory is a model of physics whereby all \"particles\" that make up matter are composed of strings (measuring at the Planck length) that exist in an 11-dimensional (according to M-theory, the leading version) or 12-dimensional (according to F-theory) universe. These strings vibrate at different frequencies that determine mass, electric charge, color charge, and spin. A \"string\" can be open (a line) or closed in a loop (a one-dimensional sphere, like a circle). As a string moves through space it sweeps out something called a \"world sheet\". String theory predicts 1- to 10-branes (a 1-brane being a string and a 10-brane being a 10-dimensional object) that prevent tears in the \"fabric\" of space using the uncertainty principle (e.g., the electron orbiting a hydrogen atom has the probability, albeit small, that it could be anywhere else in the universe at any given moment).\nString theory proposes that our universe is merely a 4-brane, inside which exist the 3\u00a0space dimensions and the 1 time dimension that we observe. The remaining 7\u00a0theoretical dimensions either are very tiny and curled up (and too small to be macroscopically accessible) or simply do not/cannot exist in our universe (because they exist in a grander scheme called the \"multiverse\" outside our known universe).\nSome predictions of the string theory include existence of extremely massive counterparts of ordinary particles due to vibrational excitations of the fundamental string and existence of a massless spin-2 particle behaving like the graviton.\nTechnicolor.\nTechnicolor theories try to modify the Standard Model in a minimal way by introducing a new QCD-like interaction. This means one adds a new theory of so-called Techniquarks, interacting via so called Technigluons. The main idea is that the Higgs-Boson is not an elementary particle but a bound state of these objects.\nPreon theory.\nAccording to preon theory there are one or more orders of particles more fundamental than those (or most of those) found in the Standard Model. The most fundamental of these are normally called preons, which is derived from \"pre-quarks\". In essence, preon theory tries to do for the Standard Model what the Standard Model did for the particle zoo that came before it. Most models assume that almost everything in the Standard Model can be explained in terms of three to half a dozen more fundamental particles and the rules that govern their interactions. Interest in preons has waned since the simplest models were experimentally ruled out in the 1980s.\nAcceleron theory.\nAccelerons are the hypothetical subatomic particles that integrally link the newfound mass of the neutrino to the dark energy conjectured to be accelerating the expansion of the universe.\nIn this theory, neutrinos are influenced by a new force resulting from their interactions with accelerons, leading to dark energy. Dark energy results as the universe tries to pull neutrinos apart. Accelerons are thought to interact with matter more infrequently than they do with neutrinos.\nExternal links.\nThe most important address about the current experimental and theoretical knowledge about elementary particle physics is the Particle Data Group, where different international institutions collect all experimental data and give short reviews over the contemporary theoretical understanding.\nother pages are:"}
{"id": "11278", "revid": "25353172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11278", "title": "Miami Marlins", "text": "The Miami Marlins are an American professional baseball team based in Miami. The Marlins compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) East division. Their home park is Marlins Park.\nThe franchise began play as an expansion team in the 1993 season as the Florida Marlins. The Marlins originally played home games at Joe Robbie Stadium, which they shared with the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League (NFL). In 2012, the team moved to Marlins Park, their first exclusive home and the first to be designed as a baseball park. As part of an agreement with park owner Miami-Dade County to use the stadium, the franchise also changed their name to the Miami Marlins prior to the 2012 season.\nThe Marlins have qualified for the postseason only three times, but won the World Series during their first two postseason runs in 1997 and 2003. Their three playoff appearances came as wild card teams, making them one of two MLB franchises (along with the Colorado Rockies) to have never won a division title. The Marlins are also the first team to win the World Series as a wild card.\nFranchise history.\nWayne Huizenga, CEO of Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, was awarded an expansion franchise in the National League (NL) for a $95\u00a0million expansion fee and the team began operations in 1993 as the Florida Marlins. In 2012, the team moved from the football-oriented Sun Life Stadium to Marlins Park in downtown Miami. As a condition of the move, the team was renamed the Miami Marlins, and adopted a new logo and colors.\nThe Marlins won the World Series in 1997 and 2003, but both titles were followed by controversial periods where the team sold off all the high-priced players and rebuilt. Between 2003 and 2019, the team's two World Series runs also marked their sole postseason appearances. Their three playoff qualifications and seven winning seasons are the fewest among MLB franchises. \nThrough 2020, the Marlins all-time record is 2,021-2,343 (.463)\nOn November 13, 2020, the Marlins became the first club in any American major-level sports league to hire a woman to an executive position when Kim Ng was announced as the team's general manager. In addition, she will also be MLB's first Asian American general manager.\nWorld Series championships.\nThe Marlins are the only team to win a World Series in their first two winning seasons (1997 and 2003); in fact, they are the only team to even make the playoffs in their first two winning seasons. In those two seasons, they managed to make a surprise run to the World Series, both times as heavy underdogs.\nAchievements.\nRetired numbers.\nFrom 1993 until 2011, the Marlins had retired the number 5 in honor of Carl Barger, the first president of the Florida Marlins, who had died prior to the team's inaugural season. Barger's favorite player was Joe DiMaggio, thus the selection of number 5. With the move to the new ballpark, the team opted to honor Barger with a plaque instead, and opened number 5 to circulation. Logan Morrison, a Kansas City native and fan of Royals Hall-of-Famer George Brett (who wore that number with the Royals), became the first Marlins player to wear the number.\nAfter Jos\u00e9 Fern\u00e1ndez's death as a result of a boating accident on September 25, 2016, the Miami Marlins announced plans to build a memorial at Marlins Park in his honor. However, Fern\u00e1ndez's number 16 has yet to be officially retired.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Miami Marlins farm system consists of six minor league affiliates.\nRadio and television.\nThe Marlins' flagship radio station from their inception in 1993 through 2007 was WQAM 560\u00a0AM. Although the Marlins had plans to leave WQAM after 2006, they remained with WQAM for the 2007 season. On October 11, 2007, the Marlins announced an agreement with WAXY 790\u00a0AM to broadcast all games for the 2008 season. Longtime Montreal Expo and current Marlins play-by-play radio announcer Dave Van Horne won the Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award for excellence in baseball broadcasting in 2010. He shares the play-by-play duties with Glenn Geffner.\nGames are also broadcast in Spanish on Radio Mambi 710\u00a0AM. Felo Ram\u00edrez, who calls play-by-play on that station along with Luis Quintana, won the Ford C. Frick Award from the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2005.\nMarlins games are televised by Fox Sports Florida. The last \"free TV\" broadcast of a game was on WPXM-TV in 2005.\nCulture.\nIn 1989, \"Back to the Future Part II\" had a reference to the Chicago Cubs defeating a baseball team from Miami in the 2015 World Series, ending the longest championship drought in all four of the major North American professional sports leagues. In actuality, the Cubs would end up getting swept in four games by the New York Mets in the NLCS, the Marlins failed to make the postseason, and the 2015 World Series was between the Kansas City Royals and the New York Mets, with the Royals winning in five games. Also, both the Cubs and Marlins are part of the National League, rendering a World Series matchup between the two teams impossible.\nThe Marlins were the first team in Major League Baseball to have a dance/cheer team. Debuting in 2003, the \"Marlins Mermaids\" influenced other MLB teams to develop their own cheer/dance squads; this was inspired in part by similar squads from the NFL and NBA. In 2008, the Florida Marlins debuted \"The Marlins Manatees\", Major League Baseball's first all-male dance/energy squad, to star alongside the Mermaids. As of 2012, the Marlins have abandoned the \"Mermaids\" and \"Manatees\" for in-game entertainment instead using an \"energy squad\", a co-ed group of dancers. In 2019, the Marlins brought back the Mermaids for the first time since 2012.\nThe Marlins have had many official anthems over the years, performed by such artists as Pitbull, DJ Khaled, Poo Bear and Creed frontman Scott Stapp. Stapp penned their 2010 anthem Marlins Will Soar.\nFinishes.\nBest finishes in franchise history.\nThe following are the five best seasons in Marlins history:\nWorst finishes in franchise history.\nThe following are the five worst seasons in Marlins' history:\nHome attendance.\nOther than their first few years as a franchise in the 1990s, the Marlins have consistently ranked as one of lowest attendance teams in the league, coming in last place (30th) several of the past 20 years. Even when Marlins Park was completed for the 2012 season, attendance was only average for the first year, dropping down to second to last by 2013.\nFinance.\nOpening Day salaries.\nOpening Day payrolls for 25-man roster (since 1993):\nAnnual financial records.\nThe annual financial records of the Marlins according to \"Forbes\" since 2001."}
{"id": "11281", "revid": "567924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11281", "title": "Frontline (Australian TV series)", "text": "Frontline is an Australian comedy television series which satirised Australian television current affairs programmes and reporting. It ran for three series of 13 half-hour episodes and was broadcast on ABC TV in 1994, 1995 and 1997.\nProduction.\nThe series was written, directed and produced by Jane Kennedy, Santo Cilauro, Rob Sitch and Tom Gleisner. They created and performed in the television shows \"The D-Generation\" and \"The Late Show\" before creating \"Frontline\" (as well as \"Funky Squad\" between series 1 and 2 of \"Frontline\"). After \"Frontline\" they moved into feature films, making several popular Australian movies including \"The Castle\" and \"The Dish\", and hosted \"The Panel\" for several years, before moving on to \"Thank God You're Here\" and later \"Have You Been Paying Attention?\".\nThe series was partly inspired by a \"60 Minutes\" special \"Has the media gone too far?\". It bears some similarity to the UK series \"Drop the Dead Donkey\".\nSetting.\nA commercial network.\nThe series follows the fortunes of a fictional current affairs show, \"Frontline\". In the show, \"Frontline\" competes directly with Nine's \"A Current Affair\" and Seven's \"Real Life\", which changed its name to \"Today Tonight\" from 1995 onwards.\nThe \"Frontline\" office showcases and satirises the machinations of the ruthless producers, the self-obsessed airhead host, and the ambitious, cynical reporters, all of whom resort to any sort of underhanded trick to get ratings and maintain their status\u2014including the use of hidden cameras, foot-in-the-door, bullying interview techniques, and chequebook journalism. They ingratiate themselves with the all-powerful network bosses, while the real work is in fact done by their long-suffering production staff.\nThe station itself also runs other television shows referenced by \"Frontline\" staff, such as 6 o'clock news program, a 3-hour news review show \"Sunday Forum\", a sketch show \"The Komedy Bunch\", a game show \"Jackpot\", a teen soap opera \"Sunshine Cove\" which later changed to \"Rainbow Island\", also lesser mentioned shows such as the football show \"Ball-to-Ball\", \"Late-Night OZ\", \"Cartoon Crazies\", \"The Morning Show\", \"Face the Press\" and \"Vacation\".\nAs a commentary.\nThe characters and situations were often thinly-disguised parodies of recent real events and real people, giving the show's comedy a black edge. In particular, the Season 1 episode \"The Siege\" was a replay of a controversial real life incident which had occurred just a few months earlier, told as though \"Frontline\" itself had covered the story.\nThe dim-witted, egotistical host Mike Moore was a parody of current television hosts and journalists. Sitch has claimed that none of the characters were directly based on a single person, and indeed the character of Moore was a combination of well-known characteristics of a number of high-profile television figures, including \"A Current Affair\" host Ray Martin, Martin's predecessor Mike Willesee, and \"Real Life\" host Stan Grant.\nThe ABC's media review show \"Media Watch\" was featured prominently. Much of the real life journalistic misconduct reported on \"Media Watch\" later appeared on \"Frontline\" in fictionalised form. One example of this was when \"Media Watch\" reported that Dave \"Sluggo\" Richardson had made a highly misleading report on Christopher Skase for \"Today Tonight\". Richardson was suspended from duty for a month, and in the \"One Rule for One\" episode of \"Frontline\", fictional reporter Martin di Stasio is suspended for a month for doing exactly the same thing.\nMultiple episodes of \"Frontline\" featured \"Media Watch\" segments criticising the show.\nCharacters.\nSpecial guests.\n\"Frontline\" frequently featured celebrity cameos, unusually including major Australian politicians appearing as themselves, often but not always as interviewees. The most memorable appearance is that of Pauline Hanson in \"The Shadow We Cast\" (series 3), in which she turns her famous \"please explain?\" phrase on Mike. Noel Pearson appears as an interviewee later in the same episode. Other appearances include: John Hewson in \"The Souffl\u00e9 Rises\" (series 1); Pat Cash in \"The Desert Angel\"; Cheryl Kernot in \"We Ain't Got Dames\" (series 1); Ben Elton, Bert Newton, Rosemary Margan, Amanda Keller and Anne Fulwood in \"This Night of Nights\" (series 1); Glenn Ridge in \"Add Sex and Stir\" and \"Office Mole\" (series 2); Glenn Robbins and Molly Meldrum in \"Add Sex and Stir\"; George Negus in \"Add Sex and Stir\" and \"Dick on the Line\" (series 3); and Ian Baker-Finch in \"A Hole in the Heart\". Harry Shearer appeared in the series 2 episode \"Changing the Face of Current Affairs\", where he played the character of Larry Hadges. Merv Hughes also starred in the series 2 episode \"Workin' Class Man\".\nOther guest stars appeared in mock-ups of their own shows: Mike Moore appeared on fictitious episodes of \"Burke's Backyard\" with Don Burke, Rex Hunt's fishing show, and \"The AFL Footy Show\" with Sam Newman. Stuart Littlemore, who at the time was hosting the media commentary show \"Media Watch\", appeared in several fictitious episodes as a critic of \"Frontline\".\nProduction strategies.\n\"Frontline\" broke new ground for Australian situation comedy, by adopting some innovative production strategies. Its rapid production schedule was inspired by UK series \"Drop the Dead Donkey\", where each episode was written and taped in a single week and scripts were closely based on the real news stories of the preceding seven days.\nThe \"Frontline\" scripts were likewise written and the series filmed with a short period, often within a single week. It was a fully collaborative effort, with Cilauro, Kennedy, Gleisner and Sitch all sharing writing and directing duties, and the cast all contributing ideas during all stages of production. So sometimes when the show appeared on then-current events, it was a coincidence, as episodes were delayed by several months. In other cases there was direct commentary on real events, albeit not extremely recent ones.\nTo create a heightened illusion of grainy documentary realism, footage was shot under fluorescent lights in an actual office building set, and taped on hand-held Hi-8 camcorders usually operated by Gleisner and Cilauro. The footage was then transferred onto film and finally transferred back to videotape (see: Kinescope). Footage that was portrayed as being part of the \"Frontline\" broadcast (i.e. studio or field reports) was shot at broadcast quality, to increase the \"realism\" of the satire and complement the behind-the-scenes footage.\nOther airings.\nIn 1997, Channel Seven bought the rights to the series; however, they only aired a handful of episodes. The show was perceived by management as \"too close to the bone\" for a network significantly focused upon its prime-time current affairs ratings battle with rival stations. The Comedy Channel has shown the series as late as 2005. It was shown again on ABC TV in 2018 and in 2020-21.\nIn America, \"Frontline\" was shown as either \"Behind the Frontline\" on cable or as \"Breaking News\" on PBS (which already has a news series entitled \"Frontline\").\nIn the UK, series 1 and 2 were shown by the Paramount Comedy Channel. Series 3, however, was never screened.\nIn Canada, it was aired as \"Behind the Frontline\" on Showcase in 1997.\nImpact.\nThe series was extremely popular through its run, winning a Logie Award for Most Outstanding Achievement in Comedy in 1995, and a Logie for Alison Whyte as most outstanding actress in 1997. A \"Sydney Morning Herald\" industry poll rated it No. 2 in the 25 all-time greatest Australian TV shows.\nSix episodes from series one were a core text in the Year 12 English Advanced syllabus for the Higher School Certificate in New South Wales (2000\u20132008) for Module C: Representation and Text: Elective 1: Telling the Truth. The episodes are \"Playing the Ego Card\", \"Add Sex and Stir\", \"The Siege\", \"Smaller Fish to Fry\", \"We Ain't Got Dames\", and \"This Night of Nights\". The show has also been used as a text response for both Years 11 and 12 in the English units of the Victorian Certificate of Education. Episodes of \"Frontline\" have been analysed for the Media topic in the Year 10 English syllabus in New South Wales since at least 2001 and in Western Australia since at least 2009.\nMentalAs Return.\nSitch reprised the role of Mike Moore and \"Frontline\" during a short sketch on the \"Friday Night Crack Up\" in October 2014 as part of the ABC's \"MentalAs\" campaign to raise money and awareness for mental health issues."}
{"id": "11282", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11282", "title": "Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bastiat", "text": "Claude-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bastiat (; ; 30 June 1801 \u2013 24 December 1850) was a French economist, writer and a prominent member of the French Liberal School.\nA Freemason and a member of the French National Assembly, Bastiat developed the economic concept of opportunity cost and introduced the parable of the broken window. He was described as \u201cthe most brilliant economic journalist who ever lived\u201d by economic theorist Joseph Schumpeter. \nAs an advocate of classical economics and the economics of Adam Smith, his views favored a free market and influenced the Austrian School. He is best known for his book \"The Law\" where he argued that law must protect rights such as private property, not \"plunder\" others' property.\nBiography.\nBastiat was born on 29 June 1801 in Bayonne, Aquitaine, a port town in the south of France on the Bay of Biscay. His father, Pierre Bastiat, was a prominent businessman in the town. His mother died in 1808 when Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric was seven years old. His father moved inland to the town of Mugron, with Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric following soon afterward. The Bastiat estate in Mugron had been acquired during the French Revolution and had previously belonged to the Marquis of Poyanne. Pierre Bastiat died in 1810, leaving Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric an orphan. He was fostered by his paternal grandfather and his maiden aunt Justine Bastiat. He attended a school in Bayonne, but his aunt thought poorly of it and so enrolled him in the school Saint-Sever. At age 17, he left school at Sor\u00e8ze to work for his uncle in his family's export business. It was the same firm where his father had been a partner.\nBastiat began to develop an intellectual interest as he no longer wished to work with his uncle and desired to go to Paris for formal studies. This hope never came true as his grandfather was in poor health and wished to go to the Mugron estate. Bastiat accompanied him and cared for him. The next year when Bastiat was 24, his grandfather died, leaving him the family estate, thereby providing him with the means to further his theoretical inquiries. Bastiat developed intellectual interests in several areas including philosophy, history, politics, religion, travel, poetry, political economy and biography. After the middle-class Revolution of 1830, Bastiat became politically active and was elected justice of the peace of Mugron in 1831 and to the Council General (county-level assembly) of Landes in 1832. Bastiat was elected to the national legislative assembly after the French Revolution of 1848.\nHis public career as an economist began only in 1844, when his first article was published in the \"Journal des \u00e9conomistes\" during October of that year and it was ended by his untimely death in 1850. Bastiat contracted tuberculosis, probably during his tours throughout France to promote his ideas and that illness eventually prevented him from making further speeches (particularly at the legislative assembly to which he was elected in 1848 and 1849) and ended his life. In \"The Law\", he wrote: \"Until the day of my death, I shall proclaim this principle with all the force of my lungs (which alas! is all too inadequate)\".\nThis last line is understood by translators to be a reference to the effects of his tuberculosis. During the autumn of 1850, he was sent to Italy by his doctors and he first traveled to Pisa, then to Rome. On 24 December 1850, Bastiat called those with him to approach his bed and murmured twice the words \"the truth\" before he died at the age of 49.\nWorks.\nBastiat was the author of many works on economics and political economy, generally characterized by their clear organization, forceful argumentation and acerbic wit. Economist Murray Rothbard wrote that \"Bastiat was indeed a lucid and superb writer, whose brilliant and witty essays and fables to this day are remarkable and devastating demolitions of protectionism and of all forms of government subsidy and control. He was a truly scintillating advocate of an unrestricted free market\". However, Bastiat himself declared that subsidy should be available, albeit limited under extraordinary circumstances, saying the following: \"Under extraordinary circumstances, for urgent cases, the State should set aside some resources to assist certain unfortunate people, to help them adjust to changing conditions\".\nAmong his better known works is \"Economic Sophisms\", a series of essays (originally published in the \"Journal des \u00e9conomistes\") which contain a defence of free trade. Bastiat wrote the work while living in England to advise the shapers of the French Republic on perils to avoid. \"Economic Sophisms\" was translated and adapted for an American readership in 1867 by the economist and historian of money Alexander del Mar, writing under the pseudonym Emile Walter.\n\"Economic Sophisms\" and the candlemakers' petition.\nContained within \"Economic Sophisms\" is the satirical parable known as the candlemakers' petition in which candlemakers and tallow producers lobby the Chamber of Deputies of the French July Monarchy (1830\u20131848) to block out the Sun to prevent its unfair competition with their products. Also included in the \"Sophisms\" is a facetious petition to the king asking for a law forbidding the usage of everyone's right hand, based on a presumption by some of his contemporaries that more difficulty means more work and more work means more wealth.\n\"The Law\" (1850).\nBastiat's most famous work is \"The Law\", originally published as a pamphlet in 1850. It defines a just system of laws and then demonstrates how such law facilitates a free society. In \"The Law\", Bastiat wrote that everyone has a right to protect \"his person, his liberty, and his property\". The state should be only a \"substitution of a common force for individual forces\" to defend this right. According to Bastiat, justice (meaning defense of one's life, liberty and property) has precise limits, but if government power extends further into philanthropic endeavors, then government becomes so limitless that it can grow endlessly. The resulting statism is \"based on this triple hypothesis: the total inertness of mankind, the omnipotence of the law, and the infallibility of the legislator\". The public then becomes socially engineered by the legislator and must bend to the legislators' will \"like the clay to the potter\", saying: Socialism, like the ancient ideas from which it springs, confuses the distinction between government and society. As a result of this, every time we object to a thing being done by government, the socialists conclude that we object to its being done at all. We disapprove of state education. Then the socialists say that we are opposed to any education. We object to a state religion. Then the socialists say that we want no religion at all. We object to a state-enforced equality. Then they say that we are against equality. And so on, and so on. It is as if the socialists were to accuse us of not wanting persons to eat because we do not want the state to raise grain.\nI do not dispute their right to invent social combinations, to advertise them, to advocate them, and to try them upon themselves, at their own expense and risk. But I do dispute their right to impose these plans upon us by law \u2013 by force \u2013 and to compel us to pay for them with our taxes.\nBastiat posits that the law becomes perverted when it punishes one's right to self-defense (of his life, liberty and property) in favor of another's right to legalized plunder which he defines as \"if the law takes from some persons what belongs to them, and gives it to other persons to whom it does not belong. See if the law benefits one citizen at the expense of another by doing what the citizen himself cannot do without committing a crime\" in which he includes the tax support of \"protective tariffs, subsidies, guaranteed profits, guaranteed jobs, relief and welfare schemes, public education, progressive taxation, free credit, and public works\". According to Bastiat, legal plunder can be committed in \"an infinite number of ways. Thus we have an infinite number of plans for organizing it: tariffs, protection, benefits, subsidies, encouragements, progressive taxation, public schools, guaranteed jobs, guaranteed profits, minimum wages, a right to relief, a right to the tools of labor, free credit, and so on, and so on. All these plans as a whole \u2014 with their common aim of legal plunder \u2014 constitute socialism\". Bastiat also made the following humorous point: \"If the natural tendencies of mankind are so bad that it is not safe to permit people to be free, how is it that the tendencies of these organizers are always good? Do not the legislators and their appointed agents also belong to the human race? Or do they believe that they themselves are made of a finer clay than the rest of mankind?\"\n\"What is Seen and What is Not Seen\".\nIn his 1850 essay \"Ce qu'on voit et ce qu'on ne voit pas\" (\"What is seen and what is not seen\"), Bastiat introduced through the parable of the broken window the concept of opportunity cost in all but name. This term was not coined until over sixty years after his death by Friedrich von Wieser in 1914.\nDebate with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon.\nBastiat also famously engaged in a debate between 1849 and 1850 with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon about the legitimacy of interest. As Robert Leroux argued, Bastiat had the conviction that Proudhon's anti-interest doctrine \"was the complete antithesis of any serious approach\". Proudhon famously lost his temper and declared to Bastiat: \"Your intelligence is asleep, or rather it has never been awake. You are a man for whom logic does not exist. You do not hear anything, you do not understand anything. You are without philosophy, without science, without humanity. Your ability to reason, like your ability to pay attention and make comparisons is zero. Scientifically, Mr. Bastiat, you are a dead man\".\nViews.\nBastiat asserted that the sole purpose of government is to protect the right of an individual to life, liberty and property and why it is dangerous and morally wrong for government to interfere with an individual's other personal matters. From this, Bastiat concluded that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes legal or legalized plunder which he defined as using government force and laws to take something from one individual and give it to others (as opposed to a transfer of property via mutually-agreed contracts without using fraud nor violent threats against the other party which Bastiat considered a legitimate transfer of property).\nIn \"The Law\", Bastiat explains that if the privileged classes or socialists use the government for legalized plunder, this will encourage the other socioeconomic class to also use legal plunder and that the correct response to the socialists is to cease all legal plunder. Bastiat also explains in \"The Law\" why his opinion is that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes socialist policies. When used to obtain legalized plunder for any group, he says that the law is perverted against the only things (life, liberty and property) it is supposed to defend.\nBastiat was a strong supporter of free trade who was inspired by and routinely corresponded with Richard Cobden and the English Anti-Corn Law League and worked with free-trade associations in France.\nBecause of his stress on the role of consumer demand in initiating economic progress (a form of demand-side economics), Bastiat has been described by Mark Thornton, Thomas DiLorenzo and other economists as a forerunner of the Austrian School, with Thornton positing that through taking this position on the motivations of human action he demonstrates a pronounced \"Austrian flavor\". In his \"Economic Harmonies\", Bastiat states: \nOne of Bastiat's most important contributions to economics was his admonition to the effect that good economic decisions can be made only by taking into account the \"full picture\". That is, economic truths should be arrived at by observing not only the immediate consequences\u2014that is, benefits or liabilities\u2014of an economic decision, but also by examining the long-term second and third consequences. Additionally, one must examine the decision's effect not only on a single group of people (say candlemakers) or a single industry (say candlemaking), but on all people and all industries in the society as a whole. As Bastiat famously put it, an economist must take into account both \"What is Seen and What is Not Seen\". Bastiat's \"rule\" was later expounded and developed by Henry Hazlitt in his work \"Economics in One Lesson\" in which Hazlitt borrowed Bastiat's trenchant broken window fallacy and went on to demonstrate how it applies to a wide variety of economic falsehoods.\nNegative railroad.\nA famous section of \"Economic Sophisms\" concerns the way that tariffs are inherently counterproductive. Bastiat posits a theoretical railway between Spain and France that is built to reduce the costs of trade between the two countries. This is achieved by making goods move to and from the two nations faster and more easily. Bastiat demonstrates that this situation benefits both countries' consumers because it reduces the cost of shipping goods and therefore reduces the price at market for those goods. However, each country's producers begin to criticize their governments because the other country's producers can now provide certain goods to the domestic market at reduced price. Domestic producers of these goods are afraid of being outcompeted by the newly viable industry from the other country, therefore these domestic producers demand that tariffs be enacted to artificially raise the cost of the foreign goods back to their pre-railroad levels so that they can continue to compete. Thus, Bastiat makes two significant statements here:\nTo further demonstrate his statements, Bastiat suggests\u2014in a classic \"reductio ad absurdum\"\u2014that rather than enacting tariffs, the government should simply destroy the railroad anywhere that foreign goods can outcompete local goods. Since this would be just about everywhere, he goes on to suggest that this government should simply build a broken or \"negative\" railroad right from the start and not waste time with tariffs and rail building.\nBastiat's tomb.\nBastiat died in Rome and is buried at San Luigi dei Francesi in the center of that city. He declared on his deathbed that his friend Gustave de Molinari (publisher of Bastiat's 1850 book \"The Law\") was his spiritual heir."}
{"id": "11283", "revid": "40443172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11283", "title": "Falsifiability", "text": "In the philosophy of science, a theory is falsifiable if it respects two conditions. First, it must be written in a language with a conventional empirical interpretation. Through this condition, falsifiability is about concrete evidence. Second, it must be contradicted by some basic statements of that language, statements that can be interpreted as true or false observations. The basic statements that contradict the theory are the \"potential falsifiers\". \nFalsifiability is independent of whether the contradicting statements, the potential falsifiers, are in principle possibly true or false. For example, the statement \"All swans are white\" is falsifiable because \"Here is a black swan\" is a basic statement that contradicts it. It would still be falsifiable even if, due to some laws of biology, black swans could not possibly exist.\nFalsifiability was introduced by the philosopher of science Karl Popper in his book \"Logik der Forschung\" (1934, revised and translated into English in 1959 as \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\"). He proposed it as the cornerstone of a solution to both the problem of induction and the problem of demarcation.\nPopper argued for falsifiability and opposed this to the intuitively similar concept of verifiability. Whereas verifying the claim \"All swans are white\" would require assessment of all swans, which is not possible, the single observation of a black swan is sufficient to falsify it.\nAs a key notion in the separation of science from non-science and pseudo-science, falsifiability has featured prominently in many scientific controversies and applications, even being used as legal precedent.\nThe problem of induction.\nOne of the questions in scientific method is: how does one move from observations to scientific laws? This is the problem of induction. Suppose we want to put the theory that all swans are white to the test. We come across a white swan. We cannot validly argue (or \"induce\") from \"here is a white swan\" to \"all swans are white\"; doing so would require a logical fallacy such as, for example, affirming the consequent.\nPopper's idea to solve this problem is that while it is impossible to verify that every swan is white, finding a single black swan shows that \"not\" every swan is white. We might tentatively accept the proposal that every swan is white, while looking out for examples of non-white swans that would show our conjecture to be false. Falsification uses the valid inference \"modus tollens\": if from a statement formula_1 (say some law with some initial condition) we logically deduce but what is observed is we infer that formula_1 is false. For example, given the statement \"all swans are white\" and the initial condition \"there is a swan here\", we can deduce \"the swan here is white\", but if what is observed is \"the swan here is not white\" (say black), then \"all swans are white\" is false, or it was not a swan.\nPopper's response to the problem of induction is simply that induction is actually never used in science. Instead, in Popper's view, laws are conjectured in a non-logical manner on the basis of expectations and predispositions. In contrast, the logical empiricism movement, which included such philosophers as Moritz Schlick, Rudolf Carnap, Otto Neurath and A.J. Ayer wanted to formalize the idea that, for a law to be scientific, it must be possible to argue on the basis of observations either in favor of its truth or its falsity. There was no consensus among these philosophers about how to achieve that, but the thought expressed by Mach's dictum that \"where neither confirmation nor refutation is possible, science is not concerned\" was accepted as a basic precept of critical reflection about science.\nPopper said that a demarcation criterion was possible, but we have to use the \"logical possibility\" of falsifications, which is falsifiability. He cited his encounter with psychoanalysis in the 1910s. It did not matter what observation was presented, psychoanalysis could explain it. Unfortunately, the reason why it could explain everything is that it did not exclude anything also. For Popper, this was a failure, because it meant that it could not make any prediction. From a logical standpoint, if one finds an observation that does not contradict a law, it does not mean that the law is true. A verification has no value in itself. But, if the law makes risky predictions and these are corroborated, Popper says, there is a reason to prefer this law over another law that makes less risky predictions or no predictions at all. In the definition of falsifiability, contradictions with observations are not used for actual falsifications, but for \"logical\" \"falsifications\" that show that the law makes risky predictions, which is completely different.\nOn the basic philosophical side of this issue, Popper said that some philosophers of the Vienna Circle had mixed two different problems, that of meaning and that of demarcation, and had proposed in verificationism a single solution to both: a statement that could not be verified was considered meaningless. In opposition to this view, Popper said that there are meaningful theories that are not scientific, and that, accordingly, a criterion of meaningfulness does not coincide with a criterion of demarcation.\nThe problems of falsification.\nImre Lakatos divided the problems of falsifications in two challenges. The first challenge corresponds to decisions that must be agreed upon by scientists before an attempt to falsify a theory can be successful. The second challenge is how to use falsifications (successful attempts) and corroborations (rejected attempts) to explain progress in science. Lakatos said that there were two incorrect approaches, which he called dogmatic falsificationism and naive falsificationism. Dogmatic falsificationism ignores both challenges, whereas naive falsificationism addresses the first challenge only. Lakatos contrasted them with sophisticated falsificationism, his own improvement on Popper's solution. Popper's methodology is not (and has never been) based on one of the two incorrect approaches. On the terminological side of this issue, Popper said that he never referred to his methodology as \"falsificationism\", tended to avoid this term and proposed instead the term \"critical rationalism\".\nDogmatic falsificationism.\nA dogmatic falsificationist ignores that every observation is theory impregnated. This leads to the critique that it is unclear which theory is falsified. Is it the one that is being studied or the one behind the observation? This is sometimes called the 'Duhem\u2013Quine problem'. An example is Galileo's refutation of the theory that celestial bodies are faultless crystal balls. Many considered that it was the optical theory of the telescope that was false, not the theory of celestial bodies. Another example is the theory that neutrinos are emitted in beta decays. Had they not been observed in the Cowan\u2013Reines neutrino experiment, many would have considered that the strength of the beta-inverse reaction used to detect the neutrinos was not sufficiently high. At the time, wrote, the possibility that this strength was sufficiently high was a \"rather pious hope\".\nA dogmatic falsificationist ignores the role of auxiliary hypotheses, which could explain the contradicting observation. For the falsification to logically occur, a ceteris paribus clause must say that no auxiliary hypothesis is responsible for the contradicting observation. Again, this leads to the critique that it cannot be told if it is the theory or the ceteris paribus clause that is false. Lakatos gives the example of the path of a planet. If the path contradicts Newton's law, we will not know if it is Newton's law that is false or the assumption that no other body influenced the path. Popper was aware that one can always find another auxiliary hypothesis, though he clearly distinguished falsifiable theories such as Newton theory and non-falsifiable theories on this respect.\nLakatos says that Popper's solution to these criticisms requires that one relaxes the assumption that an observation can show a theory to be false: \nMethodological falsificationism replaces the contradicting observation in a falsification with a \"contradicting observation\" accepted by convention among scientists, a convention that implies three decisions: the theory underlying the observation is correct, no auxiliary hypotheses explain this observation and the written form of the observation matches with an actual observation. The falsifiers thus depend on decisions made by scientists in view of the currently accepted technology and its associated theory. So, Popper says that \"Science does not rest upon solid bedrock\". He also says (see section ) that it's not an obstacle to the definition of an empirical basis and of falsifiability.\nNaive falsificationism.\nAccording to Lakatos, naive falsificationism is the claim that methodological falsifications can by themselves explain how scientific knowledge progresses. Very often one must deal with two or more competing theories which are both corroborated. Considering only falsifications, it is not clear why one theory is chosen above the other, even when one is corroborated more often than the other. In fact, a stronger version of the Quine-Duhem thesis says that it's not always possible to rationally pick one theory over the other using falsifications. Considering only falsifications, it is not clear why often a corroborating experiment is seen as a sign of progress. Popper's critical rationalism uses both falsifications and corroborations to explain progress in science. How corroborations and falsifications can explain progress in science was a subject of disagreement between many philosophers, especially between Lakatos and Popper.\nPopper distinguished between the creative and informal process from which theories and accepted basic statements emerge and the logical and formal process where theories are falsified or corroborated. The main issue is whether the decision to select a theory among competing theories in the light of falsifications and corroborations should be moved in the logical part as some kind of formal logic. It is a delicate question, because this logic would be inductive: it selects a universal law in view of instances. The answer of Lakatos and many others to that question is that it should. In contradistinction, for Popper, the creative and informal part is guided by methodological rules, which naturally say to favor theories that are corroborated, but this methodology can hardly be made rigorous. Popper does not discuss corroborations when he describes the purely logical part.\nPopper's way to analyze progress in science was through the concept of verisimilitude, a way to define how close a theory is to the truth, which he did not consider very significant, except (as an attempt) to describe a concept already clear in practice. Later, it was shown that the specific definition proposed by Popper cannot distinguish between two theories that are false, which is the case for all theories in the history of science. Today, there is still on going research on the general concept of verisimilitude.\nBasic statements and the definition of falsifiability.\nPopper distinguished between the logic of science and its applied \"methodology\". The logical part consists of theories, statements and their purely logical relationship. The methodological part consists, in Popper's view, of informal rules, which are used to guess theories, accept observation statements as factual, etc. When this distinction is applied to the term \"falsifiability\", it corresponds to a distinction between two completely different meanings of the term. The same is true for the term \"falsifiable\". Popper said that he only uses \"falsifiability\" or \"falsifiable\" in reference to the logical side and that, when he refers to the methodological side, he speaks instead of \"falsification\" and its problems.\nPopper said that methodological problems require proposing methodological rules. For example, one such rule is that, if one refuses to go along with falsifications, then one has retired oneself from the game of science. The logical side does not have such methodological problems, in particular with regard to the falsifiability of a theory, because basic statements are not required to be possible. Methodological rules are only needed in the context of actual falsifications.\nSo observations have two purposes in Popper's view. On the methodological side, observations can be used to show that a law is false, which Popper calls falsification. On the logical side, observations, which are purely logical constructions, do not show a law to be false, but contradict a law to show its falsifiability. Unlike falsifications and \"free from the problems of falsification\", these contradictions establish the value of the law, which may eventually be corroborated. He wrote that an entire literature exists because this distinction was not understood.\nBasic statements.\nIn Popper's view of science, statements of observation can be analyzed within a logical structure independently of any factual observations. The set of all purely logical observations that are considered constitutes the empirical basis. Popper calls them the \"basic statements\" or \"test statements\". They are the statements that can be used to show the falsifiability of a theory. Popper says that basic statements do not have to be possible in practice. It is sufficient that they are accepted by convention as belonging to the empirical language: \"they must be testable by intersubjective observation (the material requirement)\". See the examples in section .\nIn more than twelve pages of \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\" , Popper discusses informally which statements among those that are considered in the logical structure are basic statements. A logical structure uses universal classes to define laws. For example, in the law \"all swans are white\" the concept of swans is a universal class. It corresponds to a set of properties that every swan must have. It is not restricted to the swans that exist, existed or will exist. Informally, a basic statement is simply a statement that concerns only a finite number of specific instances in universal classes. In particular, an existential statement such as \"there exists a black swan\" is not a basic statement, because it is not specific about the instance. On the other hand, \"this swan here is black\" is a basic statement. Popper says that it is a singular existential statement or simply a singular statement. So, basic statements are singular (existential) statements.\nThe definition of falsifiability.\nThornton says that basic statements are statements that correspond to particular \"observation-reports\". He then gives Popper's definition of falsifiability:\nAs in the case of actual falsifiers, decisions must be taken by scientists to accept a logical structure and its associated empirical basis, but these are usually part of a background knowledge that scientists have in common and, often, no discussion is even necessary. The first decision described by Lakatos is implicit in this agreement, but the other decisions are not needed. This agreement, if one can speak of agreement when there is not even a discussion, exists only in principle. This is where the distinction between the logical and methodological sides of science becomes important. When an actual falsifier is proposed, the technology used is considered in detail and, as described in section , an actual agreement is needed. This may require using a deeper empirical basis, hidden within the current empirical basis, to make sure that the properties or values used in the falsifier were obtained correctly ( gives some examples).\nPopper says that despite the fact that the empirical basis can be shaky, more comparable to a swamp than to solid ground, the definition that is given above is simply the formalization of a natural requirement on scientific theories, without which the whole logical process of science would not be possible.\nInitial condition and prediction in falsifiers of laws.\nIn his analysis of the scientific nature of universal laws, Popper arrived at the conclusion that laws must \"allow us to deduce, roughly speaking, more \"empirical\" singular statements than we can deduce from the initial conditions alone.\" A singular statement that has one part only can not contradict a universal law. It can only contradict a prediction that is obtained from the law together with another singular statement, the initial condition. A falsifier of a law has always two parts: the initial condition and the singular statement that contradicts the prediction.\nThere is no need to require that falsifiers have two parts in the definition itself. This removes the requirement that a falsifiable statement must make prediction. In this way, the definition is more general and allows the basic statements themselves to be falsifiable. Criteria that require that \"a law\" must be predictive, just as is required by falsifiability, Popper wrote, \"have been put forward as criteria of the meaningfulness of sentences (rather than as criteria of demarcation applicable to theoretical systems) again and again after the publication of [his] book, even by critics who pooh-poohed [his] criterion of falsifiability.\"\nExamples of demarcation and applications.\nNewton's theory.\nIn response to Lakatos who suggested that Newton's theory was as hard to show falsifiable as Freud's psychoanalytic theory, Popper gave the example of an apple that moves from the ground up to a branch and then starts to dance from one branch to another. It is clearly impossible, yet a basic statement that is a valid potential falsifier for Newton's theory, because the position of the apple at different times can be measured.\nEinstein's equivalence principle.\nAnother example of a basic statement is \"The inert mass of this object is ten times larger than its gravitational mass.\" This is a basic statement because the inert mass and the gravitational mass can both be measured separately, even though it never happens that they are different. It is, as described by Popper, a valid falsifier for Einstein's equivalence principle.\nEvolution.\nIndustrial melanism.\nAn example of a basic statement in the theory of evolution is \"In this industrial area, the relative fitness of the white-bodied peppered moth is high.\" Here \"fitness\" means \"reproductive success over the next generation\". This is an example of a basic statement, because it is possible to separately determine the kind of environment, industrial vs natural, and the relative fitness of the white-bodied form (relative to the black-bodied form) in an area, even though it never happens that the white-bodied form has a high relative fitness in an industrial area. \"In industrial areas, the black form of the peppered moth has higher relative fitness (due to a better camouflage)\" is a famous example of a falsifiable statement that illustrates the effect of natural selection.\nPrecambrian rabbit.\nA famous example of a basic statement from J.B.S. Haldane is \"[These are] fossil rabbits in the Precambrian era.\" This is a basic statement because it is possible to find a fossil rabbit and to determine that the date of a fossil is in the Precambrian era, even though it never happens that the date of a rabbit fossil is in the Precambrian era. Despite opinions to the contrary, some times wrongly attributed to Popper, this shows the scientific character of paleontology or the history of the evolution of life on Earth, because it contradicts the hypothesis in paleontology that all mammals existed in a much more recent era. Richard Dawkins adds that any other modern animal, such as a hippo, would suffice.\nSimple examples of non-falsifiable statements.\nA simple example of a non-basic statement is \"this angel does not have large wings\". It is not a basic statement, because though the absence of large wings can be observed, no technology (independent of the presence of wings) exists to identify angels. Even if it is accepted that angels exist, the sentence \"All angels have large wings\" is not falsifiable.\nAnother example from Popper of a non-basic statement is \"This human action is altruistic.\" It is not a basic statement, because no accepted technology allows us to determine whether or not an action is motivated by self-interest. Because no basic statement falsifies it, the statement that \"All human actions are egotistic, motivated by self-interest\" is thus not falsifiable.\nOmphalos hypothesis.\nSome adherents of young-Earth creationism make an argument (called the Omphalos hypothesis after the Greek word for navel) that the world was created with the appearance of age; e.g., the sudden appearance of a mature chicken capable of laying eggs. This ad hoc hypothesis introduced into young-Earth creationism makes it non-falsifiable because it says that the time of creation (of a species) measured by the accepted technology is illusory and no accepted technology is proposed to measure the claimed \"actual\" time of creation. Popper says that it's fine to modify a theory by the introduction of an auxiliary hypothesis, but the new theory must at the least remain falsifiable, which is not the case here. One can also present the Omphalos hypothesis as an auxiliary hypothesis that is introduced into the accepted theory. In this view, the new theory remains falsifiable, but its falsifiability does not increase, because no additional observations are predicted. In both views, the ad hoc hypothesis, seen by itself, is not falsifiable because there is no way to measure the claimed \"actual\" time of creation that is proposed by this hypothesis. This is discussed in details by Dienes in the case of a variation on the Omphalos hypothesis, which, in addition, specifies that God made the creation in this way to test our faith.\nUseful metaphysical statements.\n discussed statements such as \"All men are mortal\". This is not falsifiable, because it does not matter how old a man is, maybe it will die next year. Maxwell said that this statement is nevertheless useful, because it is often corroborated. He coined the term \"corroboration without demarcation\". Popper's view is that it is indeed useful, but only because it is indirectly corroborated by the corroboration of the falsifiable law \"All men die before the age of 150.\" For Popper, if no such a falsifiable law exists, then the metaphysical law is not useful, because it's not indirectly corroborated.\nMaxwell also used the example \"All solids have a melting point.\" This is not falsifiable, because maybe the melting point will be reached at a higher temperature. The law is falsifiable and more useful if we specify an upper bound on melting points or a way to calculate this upper bound. Another example from Maxwell is \"All beta decays are accompanied with a neutrino emission from the same nucleus.\" This is also not falsifiable, because maybe the neutrino can be detected in a different manner. The law is falsifiable and much more useful from a scientific point of view, if the method to detect the neutrino is specified.\nMaxwell said that most scientific laws are metaphysical statements of this kind, which, Popper said, need to be made more precise before they can be indirectly corroborated. In his critique of the falsifiability criterion, Maxwell considered the requirement for decisions in the falsification of, both, the emission of neutrinos (see ) and the existence of the melting point.\nAnother example, from the pepper moth example, is \"In all areas, the white vs black trait of the pepper moth affects its fitness.\" This is also not falsifiable, because maybe the right environmental factor was not yet considered. When it is specified, namely, fitness in polluted industrial areas vs non polluted areas, then the law is falsifiable and it says which environmental factor should be considered to actually see an effect.\nNatural selection.\nIn the 5th and 6th editions of On the origin of species, following a suggestion of Alfred Russel Wallace, Darwin used \"Survival of the fittest\", an expression first coined by Herbert Spencer, as a synonym for \"Natural Selection\". Popper and others said that, if one uses the most widely accepted definition of \"fitness\" in modern biology (see subsection ), namely reproductive success itself, the expression \"survival of the fittest\" is a tautology.\nIn practice, as illustrated by the peppered moth example of section , the questions asked are of the kind how specific traits affect the survival rate or fitness of a species when confronted by an environmental factor such as industrial pollution. Great Darwinist Ronald Fisher worked out mathematical theorems to help answer this kind of questions. But, for Popper and others, there is no (falsifiable) law of Natural Selection in this, because it only applies to some rare traits. Instead, for Popper, the work of Fisher and others on Natural Selection is part of an important metaphysical research program.\nMathematics.\nPopper said that not all non-falsifiable statements are useless in science. Mathematical statements are good examples. Like all formal sciences, mathematics is not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the empirical world, but rather, mathematics is occupied with the theoretical, abstract study of such topics as quantity, structure, space and change. Methods of the mathematical sciences are, however, applied in constructing and testing scientific models dealing with observable reality. Albert Einstein wrote, \"One reason why mathematics enjoys special esteem, above all other sciences, is that its laws are absolutely certain and indisputable, while those of other sciences are to some extent debatable and in constant danger of being overthrown by newly discovered facts.\"\nHistoricism.\nTheories of history or politics that allegedly predict future events have a logical form that renders them neither falsifiable nor verifiable. They claim that for every historically significant event, there exists an historical or economic law that \"determines\" the way in which events proceeded. Failure to identify the law does not mean that it does not exist, yet an event that satisfies the law does not prove the general case. Evaluation of such claims is at best difficult. On this basis, Popper \"fundamentally criticized historicism in the sense of any preordained prediction of history\" and said that neither Marxism nor psychoanalysis was science, although both made such claims.\nPopper made a clear distinction between the original theory of Marx and what came to be known as Marxism later on. For Popper, the original theory of Marx contained genuine scientific laws. Though they could not make preordained predictions, these laws constrained how changes can occur in society. One of them was that changes in society cannot \"be achieved by the use of legal or political means\". For Popper, this was testable, and in fact falsified. \"Yet instead of accepting the refutations\", Popper wrote, \"the followers of Marx re-interpreted both the theory and the evidence in order to make them agree. ... They thus gave a 'conventionalist twist' to the theory; and by this stratagem they destroyed its much advertised claim to scientific status.\"\nUse in courts of law.\nFalsifiability has been used in the \"McLean v. Arkansas\" case (in 1982), the \"Daubert\" case (in 1993) and other cases. A survey of 303 federal judges conducted in 1998 found that \"[P]roblems with the nonfalsifiable nature of an expert's underlying theory and difficulties with an unknown or too-large error rate were cited in less than 2% of cases.\"\n\"McLean v. Arkansas\" case.\nIn the ruling of the \"McLean v. Arkansas\" case, Judge William Overton used falsifiability as one of the criteria to determine that \"creation science\" was not scientific and should not be taught in Arkansas public schools as such (it can be taught as religion). In his testimony, philosopher Michael Ruse defined the characteristics which constitute science as (see and ):\nIn his conclusion related to this criterion Judge Overton stated that \nDaubert standard.\nIn several cases of the United States Supreme Court, the court described scientific methodology using the five Daubert factors, which include falsifiability. The Daubert result cited Popper and other philosophers of science: \nDavid H. Kaye said that references to the Daubert majority opinion confused falsifiability and falsification and that \"inquiring into the existence of meaningful attempts at falsification is an appropriate and crucial consideration in admissibility determinations.\"\nThe bucket and the searchlight.\nSection shows that falsifiability is useful to demarcate between scientific and non-scientific theories, but why should falsifiability be the criterion for scientific theories? The first reason that comes to mind is to support a methodological rule that can conclusively falsify these theories. However, as described in , rigorously speaking, it is not possible to falsify a theory. Moreover, as described in , falsification plays no decisive role in the choice of a new theory. Therefore, even if it was possible to rigorously falsify a theory, the usefulness of this methodological rule and indirectly of falsifiability would remain unclear. For Popper, this application of falsifiability or methodological rule suffers from the problems of falsification because it refers to an inadequate view of science, the bucket view of science. For Popper (see below), the correct application of falsifiability, i.e., his methodology, is as free from the problems of falsification as falsifiability itself, because it relies on a different view, the searchlight view of science.\nThe bucket view of science.\nSome tentative explanations for the growth of scientific knowledge are based on what Popper calls the bucket view of science. In this view, observation statements accumulate in a bucket through observations and various procedures are used to make sure that they are valid. Next, new laws are obtained in a way that can be \"justified\" using inference rules that are allowed to process all the knowledge that is available in the bucket. In this justificational picture, Hume said that we cannot obtain new universal laws (except what can be obtained through deductive rules). Hume's argument is based on reasonable premises: non-deductive rules are in need of justification, circular arguments are not valid, etc. If we accept Hume's premises, even probabilistic attempts to explain the growth of knowledge in terms of the bucket view of science, Popper stated, are doomed to fail.\nPopper's solution to this problem is simply to reject the bucket view of science. His main argument is basically that he accepts Hume's argument, which shows that the bucket view fails to explain the growth of objective knowledge. Popper said that the processes in the bucket are better seen as physical processes and the laws that govern these processes are biological. To help people get rid of the limitations associated with the bucket view, Popper brought out the main issue with this view: it ignores the organismic aspect of knowledge. Given that the bucket view is a dead end, it is natural to accept that biological predispositions and expectations play an important role in these processes.\nThe searchlight view of science.\nPopper proposed to replace the bucket view of science with what he called the searchlight view of science. In that view, Popper wrote, there is no reason why any methodology should work. It is easy, Popper said, to imagine universes where no methodology can work or even only exist. If you want to believe that the methodology will work, it must be postulated as an axiom. In Popper's case, the axiom is that the methodology of conjectures and refutations is going to work. The conjectures are the searchlight, because they lead to observational results. But this axiom will not help any objective rule in the justification of scientific knowledge. There is no point in attempting any justification in the searchlight view. For a popperian, the absence of these objective rules is expected. It is not a failure. In this line of thought, Einstein wrote that there is no logical path to science.\nPopper's scientific methodology that accompanies falsifiability contains rules such as \"He who decides one day that scientific statements do not call for any further test, and that they can be regarded as finally verified, retires from the game.\" In general, the rules of Popper's methodology influence which theories will be chosen or rejected, but these rules do that only through decisions taken by the scientists. As described in , every rule to determine or choose theories must rely on the good judgement of the scientists.\nWhy should falsifiability be the criterion for scientific theories?\nBack to the original question: why should falsifiability be the criterion? It is not that falsification directly leads to the rejection of a theory. That would be a rule of the bucket view of science. It is not that we must always look for theories that are more falsifiable. That would also be a rule of the bucket view of science. Popper's main methodological rule is that scientists must try to guess and corroborate (or equivalently falsify) bold and useful conjectures and take any falsification as a problem that can be used to start a critical discussion. In other words, the usefulness of falsifiability is that falsifiable conjectures say more, because they prohibit more and, in the case of their falsification, they lead to useful problems, which steer the creative process of science. For Popper, who knew most of section , this is exactly what we should expect from a scientific theory.\nThe original answer provided, which is the possibility to actually falsify a theory as if there was a rule to eliminate laws, missed the whole point: No rule can supersede the hidden organic aspect of knowledge in the processing of the available objective knowledge. If there is any inference rule, the final decision must still be left to the organic aspect or, more simply, to the scientists. For Popper, inference rules are tantamount to a \"quest for certainty\", which he saw as the main weakness of the bucket view of science.\nIn , it is seen that Lakatos reached the same conclusion in the following sense that he said that his methodology did not offer any \"firm heuristic advice about what to do\". Before Popper's time, in 1906, being aware of the problems of falsification, Pierre Duhem reached the same conclusion. Popper reemphasized non-justificationism, which was a good match for his added falsifiability criterion and associated critical methodology.\nControversies.\nMethodless creativity versus inductive methodology.\nAs described in section , Lakatos and Popper agreed that universal laws cannot be logically deduced (except from laws that say even more). But unlike Popper, Lakatos felt that if the explanation for new laws can not be deductive, it must be inductive. He urged Popper explicitly to adopt some inductive principle and sets himself the task to find an inductive methodology. However, the methodology that he found did not offer any exact inductive rules. In a response to Kuhn, Feyerabend and Musgrave, Lakatos acknowledged that the methodology depends on the good judgment of the scientists. Feyerabend wrote in \"Against Method\" that Lakatos' methodology of scientific research programmes is epistemological anarchism in disguise and Musgrave made a similar comment. In more recent work, Feyerabend says that Lakatos uses rules, but whether or not to follow any of these rules is left to the judgment of the scientists. This is also discussed elsewhere.\nPopper also offered a methodology with rules, but these rules are also not inductive rules, because they are not by themselves used to accept laws or establish their validity. They do that through the creativity or \"good judgment\" of the scientists only. For Popper, the required non deductive component of science never had to be an inductive methodology. He always viewed this component as a creative process beyond the explanatory reach of any rational methodology, but yet used to decide which theories should be studied and applied, find good problems and guess useful conjectures. Quoting Einstein to support his view, Popper said that this renders obsolete the need for an inductive methodology or logical path to the laws. For Popper, no inductive methodology was ever proposed to satisfactorily explain science.\nAhistorical versus historiographical.\nSection says that both Lakatos's and Popper's methodology are not inductive. Yet Lakatos's methodology extended importantly Popper's methodology: it added a historiographical component to it. This allowed Lakatos to find corroborations for his methodology in the history of science. The basic units in his methodology, which can be abandoned or pursued, are research programmes. Research programmes can be degenerative or progressive and only degenerative research programmes must be abandoned at some point. For Lakatos, this is mostly corroborated by facts in history.\nIn contradistinction, Popper did not propose his methodology as a tool to reconstruct the history of science. Yet, some times, he did refer to history to corroborate his methodology. For example, he remarked that theories that were considered great successes were also the most likely to be falsified. Zahar's view was that, with regard to corroborations found in the history of science, there was only a difference of emphasis between Popper and Lakatos.\nAs an anecdotal example, in one of his articles Lakatos challenged Popper to show that his theory was falsifiable: he asked \"Under what conditions would you give up your demarcation criterion?\". Popper replied \"I shall give up my theory if Professor Lakatos succeeds in showing that Newton's theory is no more falsifiable by 'observable states of affairs' than is Freud's.\"\nNormal science versus revolutionary science.\nThomas Kuhn analyzed what he calls periods of normal science as well as revolutions from one period of normal science to another, whereas Popper's view is that only revolutions are relevant. For Popper, the role of science, mathematics and metaphysics, actually the role of any knowledge, is to solve puzzles. In the same line of thought, Kuhn observes that in periods of normal science the scientific theories, which represent some paradigm, are used to routinely solve puzzles and the validity of the paradigm is hardly in question. It's only when important new puzzles emerge that cannot be solved by accepted theories that a revolution might occur. This can be seen as a viewpoint on the distinction made by Popper between the informal and formal process in science (see section ). In the big picture presented by Kuhn, the routinely solved puzzles are corroborations. Falsifications or otherwise unexplained observations are unsolved puzzles. All of these are used in the informal process that generates a new kind of theory. Kuhn says that Popper emphasizes formal or logical falsifications and fails to explain how the social and informal process works.\nAstrology: falsified or not falsifiable?\nPopper often uses astrology as an example of a pseudo-science. He says that it is not falsifiable because both the theory itself and its predictions are too imprecise. Kuhn, as an historian of science, remarked that many predictions made by astrologers in the past were quite precise and they were very often falsified. He also said that astrologers themselves acknowledged these falsifications.\nAnything goes versus scientific method.\nPaul Feyerabend rejected any prescriptive methodology at all. He rejected Lakatos' argument for \"ad hoc\" hypothesis, arguing that science would not have progressed without making use of any and all available methods to support new theories. He rejected any reliance on a scientific method, along with any special authority for science that might derive from such a method. He said that if one is keen to have a universally valid methodological rule, epistemological anarchism or \"anything goes\" would be the only candidate. For Feyerabend, any special status that science might have, derives from the social and physical value of the results of science rather than its method.\nSokal and Bricmont.\nIn their book \"Fashionable Nonsense\" (from 1997, published in the UK as \"Intellectual Impostures\") the physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont criticised falsifiability. They include this critique in the \"Intermezzo\" chapter, where they expose their own views on truth in contrast to the extreme epistemological relativism of postmodernism. Even though Popper is clearly not a relativist, Sokal and Bricmont discuss falsifiability because they see postmodernist epistemological relativism as a reaction to Popper's description of falsifiability, and more generally, to his theory of science."}
{"id": "11284", "revid": "1012987947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11284", "title": "Freikorps", "text": "Freikorps (, \"Free Corps\") were irregular German and other European military volunteer units, or paramilitary, that existed from the 18th to the early 20th centuries. They effectively fought as mercenary or private armies, regardless of their own nationality. In German-speaking countries, the first so-called \"Freikorps\" (\"free regiments\", Freie Regimenter) were formed in the 18th century from native volunteers, enemy renegades, and deserters. These sometimes exotically equipped units served as infantry and cavalry (or more rarely as artillery), sometimes in just company strength, sometimes in formations up to several thousand strong. There were also various mixed formations or legions. The Prussian \"von Kleist Freikorps\" included infantry, j\u00e4ger, dragoons and hussars. The French \"Volontaires de Saxe\" combined uhlans and dragoons.\nIn the aftermath of World War I and during the German Revolution of 1918\u201319, \"Freikorps\" consisting largely of World War I veterans were raised as paramilitary militias. They were ostensibly mustered to fight on behalf of the government against the RSFSR-backed German communists attempting to overthrow the Weimar Republic. However, many \"Freikorps\" also largely despised the Republic and were involved in assassinations of its supporters.\nOrigins.\nThe first \"Freikorps\" were recruited by Frederick the Great during the Seven Years' War. On 15 July 1759, Frederick ordered the creation of a squadron of volunteer hussars to be attached to the 1st Regiment of Hussars (von Kleist's Own). He entrusted the creation and command of this new unit to Colonel Friedrich Wilhelm von Kleist. This first squadron (80 men) was raised in Dresden and consisted mainly of Hungarian deserters. This squadron was placed under the command of Lieutenant Johann Michael von Kovacs. At the end of 1759, the first four squadrons of dragoons (also called horse grenadiers) of the \"Freikorps\" were organised. They initially consisted of Prussian volunteers from Berlin, Magdeburg, Mecklenburg and Leipzig, but later recruited deserters. The \"Freikorps\" were regarded as unreliable by regular armies, so they were used mainly as sentries and for minor duties.\nThese early \"Freikorps\" appeared during the War of the Austrian Succession and especially the Seven Years' War, when France, Prussia, and the Habsburg Monarchy embarked on an escalation of petty warfare while conserving their regular regiments. Even during the last Kabinettskrieg, the War of the Bavarian Succession, \"Freikorp\" formations were formed in 1778. Germans, Hungarians, Poles, Lithuanians, and South Slavs, as well as Turks, Tatars and Cossacks, were believed by all warring parties to be inherently good fighters. The nationality of many soldiers can no longer be ascertained as the ethnic origin was often described imprecisely in the regimental lists. Slavs (Croats, Serbs) were often referred to as \"Hungarians\" or just \"Croats\", and Muslim recruits (Albanians, Bosnians, Tatars) as \"Turks\".\nFor Prussia, the Pandurs, who were made up of Croats and Serbs, were a clear model for the organization of such \"free\" troops. Frederick the Great created 14 \"free infantry\" (\"Frei-Infanterie\") units, mainly between 1756 and 1758, which were intended to be attractive to those soldiers who wanted military \"adventure\", but did not want to have to do military drill. A distinction should be made between the \"Freikorps\" formed up to 1759 for the final years of the war, which operated independently and disrupted the enemy with surprise attacks, and the free infantry which consisted of various military branches (such as infantry, hussars, dragoons, \"j\u00e4ger\") and were used in combination. They were often used to ward off Maria Theresa's Pandurs. In the era of linear tactics, light troops had been seen necessary for outpost, reinforcement and reconnaissance duties. During the war, eight such volunteer corps were set up:\nBecause, with some exceptions, they were seen as undisciplined and less battleworthy, they were used for less onerous guard and garrison duties. In the so-called \"petty wars\", the \"Freikorps\" interdicted enemy supply lines with guerrilla warfare. In the case of capture, their members were at risk of being executed as irregular fighters. In Prussia the \"Freikorps\", which Frederick the Great had despised as \"vermin\", were disbanded. Their soldiers were given no entitlement to pensions or invalidity payments.\nIn France, many corps continued to exist until 1776. They were attached to regular dragoon regiments as \"j\u00e4ger\" squadrons. During the Napoleonic Wars, Austria recruited various \"Freikorps\" of Slavic origin. The Slavonic Wurmser \"Freikorps\" fought in Alsace. The combat effectiveness of the six Viennese \"Freikorps\" (37,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen), however, was low. An exception were the border regiments of Croats and Serbs who served permanently on the Austro-Ottoman border.\nNapoleonic era.\n\"Freikorps\" in the modern sense emerged in Germany during the course of the Napoleonic Wars. They fought not so much for money but for patriotic reasons, seeking to shake off the French Confederation of the Rhine. After the French under Emperor Napoleon had either conquered the German states or forced them to collaborate, remnants of the defeated armies continued to fight on in this fashion. Famous formations included the King's German Legion, who had fought for Britain in French-occupied Spain and mainly were recruited from Hanoverians, the L\u00fctzow Free Corps and the Black Brunswickers.\nThe \"Freikorps\" attracted many nationally disposed citizens and students. \"Freikorps\" commanders such as Ferdinand von Schill, Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm von L\u00fctzow or Frederick William, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, known as the \"Black Duke\", led their own attacks on Napoleonic occupation forces in Germany. Those led by Schill were decimated in the Battle of Stralsund (1809); many were killed in battle or executed at Napoleon's command in the aftermath. The \"Freikorps\" were very popular during the period of the German War of Liberation (1813\u201315), during which von L\u00fctzow, a survivor of Schill's \"Freikorps\", formed his L\u00fctzow Free Corps. The anti-Napoleonic \"Freikorps\" often operated behind French lines as a kind of commando or guerrilla force.\nThroughout the 19th century, these anti-Napoleonic \"Freikorps\" were greatly praised and glorified by German nationalists, and a heroic myth built up around their exploits. This myth was invoked, in considerably different circumstances, in the aftermath of Germany's defeat in World War I.\n1815\u201371.\nEven in the aftermath of the Napoleonic era, \"Freikorps\" were set up with varying degrees of success.\nDuring the March 1848 riots, student \"Freikorps\" were set up in Munich.\nIn First Schleswig War of 1848 the \"Freikorps\" of \"von der Tann\", \"Zastrow\" and others distinguished themselves.\nIn 1864 in Mexico, the French formed the so-called \"Contreguerrillas\" under former Prussian hussar officer, Milson. In Italy, Garibaldi formed his famous \"Freischars\", notably the \"Thousand of Marsala\", which landed in Sicily in 1860.\nEven before the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71, \"Freikorps\" were developed in France that were known as franc-tireurs.\nPost-World War I.\nThe meaning of the word \"Freikorps\" changed over time. After 1918, the term was used for the paramilitary organizations that sprang up around Germany as soldiers returned in defeat from World War I. They were the key Weimar paramilitary groups active during that time. Many German veterans felt disconnected from civilian life, and joined a \"Freikorps\" in search of stability within a military structure. Others, angry at their sudden, apparently inexplicable defeat, joined up in an effort to put down communist uprisings, such as the Spartacist uprising, or exact some form of revenge on those they considered responsible for the armistice. They received considerable support from Minister of Defence Gustav Noske, a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany. Noske used them to suppress the German Revolution of 1918\u201319 and the Marxist Spartacist League, including summarily executing revolutionary leaders Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg on 15 January 1919. They were used to defeat the Bavarian Soviet Republic in May 1919.\nOn 5 May 1919, members of \"Freikorps\" L\u00fctzow in Perlach near Munich, acted on a tip from a local cleric and arrested and killed twelve alleged communist workers (most of them actually members of the Social Democratic Party). A memorial on Pfanzeltplatz in Munich today commemorates the incident. In another incident on May 6, 1919, \"Freikorps\" forces in Munich entered a Catholic Church proceeding to beat and then shoot 25 people who had been falsely accused of being Communists.\n\"Freikorps\" also fought against the communists in the Baltics, Silesia, Poland and East Prussia after the end of World War I, including aviation combat, often with significant success. Anti-Slavic racism was sometimes present, although the ethnic cleansing ideology and anti-Semitism expressed in later years had not yet developed. In the Baltics they fought against communists as well as against the newborn independent democratic countries Estonia and Latvia. In Latvia, Freikorps murdered 300 civilians in Mitau who were suspected of having \"Bolshevik sympathies\". After the capture of Riga, another 3000 alleged communists were killed, including summary executions of 50\u201360 prisoners daily. Though officially disbanded in 1920, some of them continued to exist for several years and many \"Freikorps\" attempted, unsuccessfully, to overthrow the government in the Kapp Putsch in March 1920. Their attack was halted when German citizens loyal to the government went on strike, cutting off many services and making daily life so problematic that the coup was called off.\nIn 1920, Adolf Hitler had just begun his political career as the leader of the tiny and as-yet-unknown Deutsche Arbeiterpartei/DAP German Workers' Party, which was soon renamed the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei/NSDAP (National Socialist German Workers Party) or Nazi Party in Munich. Numerous future members and leaders of the Nazi Party had served in the \"Freikorps\", including Ernst R\u00f6hm, future head of the Sturmabteilung, or SA, Heinrich Himmler, future head of the Schutzstaffel, or SS, and Rudolf H\u00f6\u00df, the future \"Kommandant\" of the Auschwitz concentration camp. Hermann Ehrhardt, founder and leader of the Marinebrigade Ehrhardt, and his deputy Commander Eberhard Kautter, leaders of the Viking League, refused to help Hitler and Erich Ludendorff in their 1923 Beer Hall Putsch and conspired against them.\nHitler eventually viewed some of them as threats. A huge ceremony was arranged on 9 November 1933 in which the \"Freikorps\" leaders symbolically presented their old battle flags to Hitler's SA and SS. It was a sign of allegiance to their new authority, the Nazi state. When Hitler's internal purge of the party, the Night of the Long Knives, came in 1934, a large number of Freikorps leaders were targeted for killing or arrest, including Ehrhardt and R\u00f6hm. Historian Robert GL Waite claims that in Hitler's \"R\u00f6hm Purge\" speech to the \"Reichstag\" on 13 July 1934, he implied that the Freikorps were one of the groups of \"pathological enemies of the state\".\nWorld War II.\nIn French, the Freikorps are referred to as \"Corps Franc\". Starting in October 1939, the French Army raised a number of Corps Franc units with the mission of carrying out ambush, raid, and harassing operations forward of the Maginot Line during the period known as the Phoney War (Dr\u00f4le de Guerre). They were tasked with attacking German troops guarding the Siegfried Line. Future Vichy collaborationist, Anti-Bolshevik and SS Major Joseph Darnand was one of the more famous participants in these commando actions.\nIn May 1940, the experience of the Phoney War-era Corps Franc was an influence in creating the Groupes Francs Motoris\u00e9 de Cavalerie (GFC) who played a storied role in the delaying operations and last stands of the Battle of France, notably in the defenses of the Seine and the Loire.\nCorps Francs d'Afrique.\nOn 25 November 1942, in the immediate aftermath of the Allied Invasion of Vichy French North Africa the Corps Francs d'Afrique (CFA) (African Corps Franc) was raised in French Morocco within the Free French Forces by General Giraud. Giraud drew the members of the all-volunteer unit from Moroccans of diverse religious backgrounds (Christian, Jew, and Muslim) and gave them the title of \"V\u00e9lite,\" a name inspired by the elite light infantry of Napoleon's Imperial Guard, who were named after the Roman Velites. Much of the Corps was drawn from Henri d'Astier de la Vigerie and Jos\u00e9 Aboulker's G\u00e9o Gras French Resistance Group which had been responsible for the Algiers Insurrection where the Resistance seized control of Algiers on the night of 8 November 1942 in coordination with the Allied landings happening that same night. In taking over Algiers, they managed to capture both Admiral Darlan and General Juin, which led to the Darlan Deal wherein Vichy French forces came over to the Allied side. Darlan was later assassinated by Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle, an early member of the Corps Francs d'Afrique. They functioned as the Free French equivalent to the British Commandos. \nThe Corps Francs d'Afrique went on to fight Rommel's Afrikakorps in Tunisia with the U.S. 5th Army. They fought alongside the British 139th Brigade at Kassarine and Sidi Nasr, where they famously conducted a heroic bayonet charge, facing two to one odds, against the Italian 34th Battalion of the 10th Bersaglieri near the mountain of Kef Zilia on the road to Bizerte, taking 380 prisoners, killing the Italian battalion commander, and capturing the plans for Operation Auslading. They participated in the capture of Bizerte in May 1943.\nFor its actions, the Corps Franc d'Afrique was awarded the Croix de Guerre.\nThe CFA formally was dissolved on 9 July 1943, with its members and equipment forming the corps of the newly created African Commando Group (GCA) on 13 July 1943 in Dupleix, Algeria, today seen as a forebear to the postwar Parachutist Shock Battalions and the modern day 13th RDP. The GCA went on to fight at Pianosa, Elba, Salerno, Provence, Belfort, Giromagny, Alsace, Cernay, Guebwiller, Buhl, and the Invasion of Germany.\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "11285", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11285", "title": "Francisco I. Madero", "text": "Francisco Ignacio Madero Gonz\u00e1lez (; 30 October 1873 \u2013 22 February 1913) was a Mexican revolutionary, writer and statesman who served as the 37th president of Mexico from 1911 until shortly before his assassination in 1913. A wealthy landowner, he was nonetheless an advocate for social justice and democracy. Madero was notable for challenging long-time President Porfirio D\u00edaz for the presidency in 1910 and being instrumental in sparking the Mexican Revolution.\nBorn into an extremely wealthy family in the northern state of Coahuila, Madero was an unusual politician, who until he ran for president in the 1910 elections, had never held office. In his 1908 book entitled \"The Presidential Succession in 1910\", Madero called on voters to prevent the sixth reelection of Porfirio D\u00edaz, which Madero considered anti-democratic. His vision would lay the foundation for a democratic, twentieth-century Mexico, but without polarizing the social classes. To that effect, he bankrolled the opposition Anti-Reelectionist Party and urged voters to oust D\u00edaz in the 1910 election. Madero's candidacy against D\u00edaz garnered widespread support in Mexico. He was possessed of independent financial means, ideological determination, and the bravery to oppose D\u00edaz when it was dangerous to do so. D\u00edaz had Madero arrested before the elections, which were then seen as fraudulent. Madero escaped from prison and issued the Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed from the United States. For the first time, he called for an armed uprising against the illegitimately elected D\u00edaz, and outlined a program of reform. The armed phase of the Mexican Revolution dates to his plan.\nUprisings in Morelos under Emiliano Zapata and in the north by Pascual Orozco, Pancho Villa and others and the inability of the Federal Army to suppress them forced D\u00edaz's resignation on 25 May 1911, after the signing of the Treaty of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez; Madero was enormously popular among many sectors, but he did not assume the presidency. An interim president was installed and elections were scheduled for fall 1911. Madero was elected president on 15 October 1911 by almost 90% of the vote. Sworn into office on 6 November 1911, he became one of Mexico's youngest elected presidents, having just turned 38.\nMadero's administration soon encountered opposition both from more radical revolutionaries and from conservatives. He did not move quickly on land reform, which was a key demand of many of his supporters. Former supporter Emiliano Zapata declared himself in rebellion against Madero in the Plan of Ayala as Pascual Orozco did in his Plan Orozquista. These were significant challenges to Madero's presidency. Labor also became disillusioned by his moderate policies. Foreign entrepreneurs were concerned that Madero was unable to maintain political stability that would keep their investments safe. Foreign governments were concerned that a destabilized Mexico would threaten the international order.\nIn February 1913, a military coup took place in the Mexican capital led by General Victoriano Huerta, the military commander of the city, and supported by the United States ambassador. Madero was arrested and a short time later assassinated along with his vice-president, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Pino Su\u00e1rez, on 22 February 1913, following the series of events known as the Ten Tragic Days (la \"Decena Tr\u00e1gica\"). In death, Madero became a unifying force of disparate elements in Mexico opposed to the regime of Huerta. In the north, governor of Coahuila Venustiano Carranza led what became the Constitutionalist Army against Huerta, while Zapata continued in his rebellion under the Plan of Ayala. Once Huerta was ousted in July 1914, the opposition coalition held together by Madero's memory dissolved and Mexico entered a new stage of civil war.\nEarly years (1873\u20131903).\nFamily background.\nMadero was born in the hacienda of El Rosario, in Parras de la Fuente, Coahuila, the first son of Francisco Ignacio Madero Hern\u00e1ndez and Mercedes Gonz\u00e1lez Trevi\u00f1o, and the first grandson of family patriarch, Evaristo Madero, governor of Coahuila. He was sickly as a child, and was small in stature as an adult. It is widely believed that Madero's middle initial, I, stood for Indalecio, but according to his birth certificate it stood for Ignacio. Furthermore, on the birth certificate, Ignacio was written with the archaic spelling of Ygnacio.\nHis family, of Portuguese Jewish descent, has been described as one of the five wealthiest families in Mexico. His grandfather, Evaristo Madero, began as a founder of a regional carting business, but he took advantage of economic opportunity and transported cotton from the Confederate states to Mexican ports during the U.S. Civil War (1861\u201365). Having built a diversified fortune, but before his real success, Evaristo first married Rafaela Hern\u00e1ndez Lombra\u00f1a, half-sister of the powerful miner and banker Antonio V. Hern\u00e1ndez. Alongside his brother-in-law, and other of his new political family's relations, he founded the \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda Industrial de Parras\", initially involved in commercial vineyards, cotton, and textiles, and later also in mining, cotton mills, ranching, banking, coal, guayule rubber, and foundries in the later part of the nineteenth century. For many years, the family prospered during Porfirio D\u00edaz's regime, and by 1910 the family was one of the richest in Mexico, worth 30 million pesos ($15\u00a0million U.S. dollars of the day, and almost $500 million U.S. dollars in today's money). Much of this wealth arose from the diversification of Madero lands during the 1890s into the production of \"guayule\" rubber plants.\nAfter the death of his first wife, and having built his success, Evaristo Madero remarried to Do\u00f1a Manuela de Far\u00edas Benavides, member of one of northern Mexico's most aristocratic families, daughter of Don Juan Francisco de Far\u00edas, mayor of Laredo. Evaristo Madero also served as governor of Coahuila from 1880 to 1884, during the four-year interregnum of Porfirio D\u00edaz's rule. Afterwards, Evaristo was permanently sidelined from political office when D\u00edaz returned to the presidency in 1884 and served until 1911. Evaristo Madero's two marriages were fruitful, with a total of 18 children, 14 of whom would survive until adulthood, and whose descendants make up some of Mexico's most influential families until this day. Thus, young Francisco was a member of a huge and powerful northern Mexican clan with a focus on commercial rather than political interests.\nEducation.\nFrancisco and his brother Gustavo A. Madero attended the Jesuit college in Saltillo, but his early Catholic education had little lasting impact. As a young man, his father sent him to carry out preparatory studies at the Culver Academies in the United States and later at the Lyc\u00e9e Hoche in Versailles, France, where he completed the classe pr\u00e9paratoire aux grandes \u00e9coles program. Soon after, he was admitted to study business at the prestigious \u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes Commerciales de Paris (HEC).\nHis father's subscription to the magazine \"Revue Spirite\" awakened in the young Madero an interest in Spiritism, an offshoot of Spiritualism. During his time in Paris, Madero made a pilgrimage to the tomb of Allan Kardec, the founder of Spiritism, and became a passionate advocate of the belief, soon coming to believe he was a medium.\nFollowing business school, Madero traveled to the University of California, Berkeley, to study agricultural techniques and to improve his English. During his time there, he was influenced by the theosophist ideas of Annie Besant, which were prominent at nearby Stanford University.\nReturn to Mexico.\nIn 1893, the 20-year-old Madero returned to Mexico and assumed management of the Madero family's hacienda at San Pedro, Coahuila. Well traveled and well educated, he was now in robust health. Proving an enlightened and progressive member of the Madero commercial complex, Francisco installed new irrigation, introduced American cotton and cotton machinery, and built a soap factory and also an ice factory. He embarked on a lifelong commitment to philanthropy. His employees were well paid and received regular medical exams; he built schools, hospitals, and community kitchens; and he paid to support orphans and award scholarships. He also taught himself homeopathy and offered medical treatments to his employees. Francisco became increasingly engaged with Spiritism and in 1901 was convinced that the spirit of his brother Ra\u00fal, who had died at age 4, was communicating with him, urging him to do charity work and practice self-discipline and self-abnegation. Madero became a vegetarian and stopped drinking alcohol and smoking.\nAlready well-connected to a wealthy family and now well-educated in business, he had built a personal fortune of over 500,000 pesos by 1899. The family was organized on patriarchal principles, so that even though young Francisco was wealthy in his own right, his father and especially his grandfather Evaristo viewed him as someone who should be under the authority of his elders. As the eldest sibling, Francisco exercised authority over his younger brothers and sisters. In January 1903, he married Sara P\u00e9rez, first in a civil ceremony, and then a Catholic nuptial mass celebrated by the archbishop.\nPolitical career.\nIntroduction to politics (1903\u20131908).\nOn 2 April 1903, Bernardo Reyes, governor of Nuevo Le\u00f3n, violently crushed a political demonstration, an example of the increasingly authoritarian policies of president Porfirio D\u00edaz. Madero was deeply moved and, believing himself to be receiving advice from the spirit of his late brother Ra\u00fal, he decided to act. The spirit of Ra\u00fal told him, \"Aspire to do good for your fellow citizens...working for a lofty ideal that will raise the moral level of society, that will succeed in liberating it from oppression, slavery, and fanaticism.\" Madero founded the Benito Ju\u00e1rez Democratic Club and ran for municipal office in 1904, though he lost the election narrowly. In addition to his political activities, Madero continued his interest in Spiritualism, publishing a number of articles under the pseudonym of Arjuna (a prince from the \"Mahabharata\").\nIn 1905, Madero became increasingly involved in opposition to the D\u00edaz government. He organized political clubs and founded a political newspaper (\"El Dem\u00f3crata\") and a satirical periodical (\"El Mosco\", \"The Fly\"). Madero's preferred candidate, Frumencio Fuentes, was defeated by that of Porfirio D\u00edaz in Coahuila's 1905 gubernatorial elections. D\u00edaz considered jailing Madero, but Bernardo Reyes suggested that Francisco's father be asked to control his increasingly political son.\nLeader of the Anti-Re-election Movement (1908\u20131909).\nIn an interview with journalist James Creelman published on 17 February 1908 issue of \"Pearson's Magazine\", President D\u00edaz said that Mexico was ready for a democracy and that the 1910 presidential election would be a free election.\nMadero spent the bulk of 1908 writing a book, which he believed was at the direction of spirits, now including that of Benito Ju\u00e1rez himself. This book, published in January 1909, was titled \"La sucesi\u00f3n presidencial en 1910\" (\"The Presidential Succession of 1910\"). The book quickly became a bestseller in Mexico. The book proclaimed that the concentration of absolute power in the hands of one man \u2013 Porfirio D\u00edaz \u2013 for so long had made Mexico sick. Madero pointed out the irony that in 1871, Porfirio D\u00edaz's political slogan had been \"No Re-election\". Madero acknowledged that Porfirio D\u00edaz had brought peace and a measure of economic growth to Mexico. However, Madero argued that this was counterbalanced by the dramatic loss of freedom, including the brutal treatment of the Yaqui people, the repression of workers in Cananea, excessive concessions to the United States, and an unhealthy centralization of politics around the person of the president. Madero called for a return of the Liberal 1857 Constitution. To achieve this, Madero proposed organizing a Democratic Party under the slogan \"Sufragio efectivo, no reelecci\u00f3n\" (\"Effective Suffrage. No Re-election\"). Porfirio D\u00edaz could either run in a free election or retire.\nMadero's book was well received, and widely read. Many people began to call Madero \"the Apostle of Democracy\". Madero sold off much of his property \u2013 often at a considerable loss \u2013 in order to finance anti-re-election activities throughout Mexico. He founded the Anti-Re-election Center in Mexico City in May 1909, and soon thereafter lent his backing to the periodical \"El Antirreeleccionista\", which was run by the young lawyer/philosopher Jos\u00e9 Vasconcelos and another intellectual, Luis Cabrera Lobato. In Puebla, Aquiles Serd\u00e1n, from a politically engaged family, contacted Madero and as a result, formed an Anti-Re-electionist Club to organize for the 1910 elections, particularly among the working classes. Madero traveled throughout Mexico giving anti-reelectionist speeches, and everywhere he went he was greeted by crowds of thousands. His candidacy cost him financially, since he sold much of his property at a loss to back his campaign.\nIn spite of the attacks by Madero and his earlier statements to the contrary, D\u00edaz ran for re-election. In a show of U.S. support, D\u00edaz and William Howard Taft planned a summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua, for 16 October 1909, a historic first meeting between a Mexican and a U.S. president and also the first time a U.S. president would cross the border into Mexico. At the meeting, Diaz told John Hays Hammond, \"Since I am responsible for bringing several billion dollars in foreign investments into my country, I think I should continue in my position until a competent successor is found.\" The summit was a great success for D\u00edaz, but it could have been a major tragedy. On the day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, and Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man holding a concealed palm pistol along the procession route and they disarmed the assassin within only a few feet of D\u00edaz and Taft.\nThe Porfirian regime reacted to Madero by placing pressure on the Madero family's banking interests, and at one point even issued a warrant for Madero's arrest on the grounds of \"unlawful transaction in rubber\". Madero was not arrested, though, apparently due in part to the intervention of D\u00edaz's finance minister, Jos\u00e9 Yves Limantour, a friend of the Madero family. In April 1910, the Anti-Re-electionist Party met and selected Madero as their nominee for President of Mexico.\nDuring the convention, a meeting between Madero and D\u00edaz was arranged by the governor of Veracruz, Teodoro Dehesa, and took place in D\u00edaz's residence on 16 April 1910. Only the candidate and the president were present for the meeting, so the only account of it is Madero's own in correspondence. A political solution and compromise might have been possible, with Madero withdrawing his candidacy. It became clear to Madero that D\u00edaz was a decrepit old man, out of touch politically, and unaware of the extent of formal political opposition. The meeting was important for strengthening Madero's resolve that political compromise was not possible and he is quoted as saying \"Porfirio is not an imposing chief. Nevertheless, it will be necessary to start a revolution to overthrow him. But who will crush it afterwards?\" Madero was worried that Porfirio D\u00edaz would not willingly relinquish office, warned his supporters of the possibility of electoral fraud and proclaimed that \"Force shall be met by force!\"\nCampaign, arrest, escape 1910.\nMadero campaigned across the country on a message of reform and met with numerous supporters. Resentful of the \"peaceful invasion\" from the United States \"which came to control 90 percent of Mexico's mineral resources, its national railroad, its oil industry and, increasingly, its land,\" Mexico's poor and middle-class overwhelmingly showed their support for Madero. Fearful of a dramatic change in direction, on 6 June 1910, the Porfirian regime arrested Madero in Monterrey and sent him to a prison in San Luis Potos\u00ed. Approximately 5,000 other members of the Anti-Re-electionist movement were also jailed. Francisco V\u00e1zquez G\u00f3mez took over the nomination, but during Madero's time in jail, a fraudulent election was held on 21 June 1910 that gave D\u00edaz an unbelievably large margin of victory.\nMadero's father used his influence with the state governor and posted bond to give Madero the right to move about the city on horseback during the day. On 4 October 1910, Madero galloped away from his guards and took refuge with sympathizers in a nearby village. Three days later he was smuggled across the U.S. border, hidden in a baggage car by sympathetic railway workers.\nPlan of San Luis Potos\u00ed and rebellion.\nMadero set up shop in San Antonio, Texas, and quickly issued his Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed, which had been written during his time in prison, partly with the help of Ram\u00f3n L\u00f3pez Velarde. The plan proclaimed the elections of 1910 null and void, and called for an armed revolution to begin at 6\u00a0pm on 20 November 1910, against the \"illegitimate presidency/dictatorship of D\u00edaz\". At that point, Madero declared himself provisional President of Mexico, and called for a general refusal to acknowledge the central government, restitution of land to villages and Indian communities, and freedom for political prisoners. Madero's policies painted him as a leader of each of the different castes in Mexican society at the time. He was a member of the upper class; the middle class saw that he sought to gain entry into political processes; the lower class saw that he promised fairer politics and a much more substantial, equitable economic system.\nThe family drew on its financial resources to make regime change possible, with Madero's brother Gustavo A. Madero hiring the law firm of Washington lawyer Sherburne Hopkins, the \"world's best rigger of Latin American revolutions\" to foment support in the U.S. A strategy to discredit D\u00edaz with U.S. business and the U.S. government did meet some success, with Standard Oil engaging in talks with Gustavo Madero, but more importantly, the U.S. government \"bent neutrality laws for the revolutionaries.\" The U.S. Senate held hearings in 1913 as to whether the U.S. had any role in fomenting revolution in Mexico, Hopkins gave testimony that \"he did not believe that it cost the Maderos themselves more than $400,000 gold\", with the aggregate cost being $1,500,000US.\nOn 20 November 1910, Madero arrived at the border and planned to meet up with 400 men raised by his uncle Catarino Garza to launch an attack on Ciudad Porfirio D\u00edaz (modern-day Piedras Negras, Coahuila). However, his uncle arrived late and brought only ten men. Madero decided to postpone the revolution. Instead, he and his brother Ra\u00fal (who had been given the same name as his late brother) traveled incognito to New Orleans, Louisiana.\nOn 14 February 1911, Madero crossed the border into Chihuahua state from Texas, and on 6 March 1911 led 130 men in an attack on Casas Grandes, Chihuahua. Madero was reported wounded in the fighting, but was saved by his personal bodyguard and Revolutionary general M\u00e1ximo Castillo. He spent the next several months as the head of the Mexican Revolution. Madero successfully imported arms from the United States, with the American government under William Howard Taft doing little to halt the flow of arms to the Mexican revolutionaries. By April the Revolution had spread to eighteen states, including Morelos where the leader was Emiliano Zapata.\nOn 1 April 1911, Porfirio D\u00edaz claimed that he had heard the voice of the people of Mexico, replaced his cabinet, and agreed to restitution of the lands of the dispossessed. Madero did not believe this statement and instead demanded the resignation of President D\u00edaz and Vice-President Ram\u00f3n Corral. Madero then attended a meeting with the other revolutionary leaders\u00a0\u2013 they agreed to a fourteen-point plan which called for pay for revolutionary soldiers; the release of political prisoners; and the right of the revolutionaries to name several members of cabinet. Madero was moderate, however. He believed that the revolutionaries should proceed cautiously so as to minimize bloodshed and should strike a deal with D\u00edaz if possible. In early May, Madero wanted to extend a ceasefire, but his fellow revolutionaries Pascual Orozco and Francisco Villa disagreed and went ahead without orders on 8 May to attack Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, which surrendered after two days of bloody fighting. The revolutionaries won this battle decisively, making it clear that D\u00edaz could no longer retain power. On 21 May 1911, the Treaty of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez was signed.\nUnder the terms of the Treaty of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, D\u00edaz and Corral agreed to resign by the end of May 1911, with D\u00edaz's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Francisco Le\u00f3n de la Barra, becoming interim president solely for the purpose of calling general elections.\nThis first phase of the Mexican Revolution thus ended with D\u00edaz leaving for exile in Europe at the end of May 1911, escorted into exile by General Victoriano Huerta. On 7 June 1911, Madero entered Mexico City in triumph where he was greeted with huge crowds shouting \"\u00a1Viva Madero!\"\nInterim Presidency of De la Barra (May\u2013November 1911).\nAlthough Madero and his supporters had forced Porfirio D\u00edaz from power, he did not assume the presidency in June 1911. Instead, following the terms of the Treaty of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, he was a candidate for president and had no formal role in the Interim Presidency of Francisco Le\u00f3n de la Barra, a diplomat and lawyer. Left in place was the Congress of Mexico, which was full of candidates whom D\u00edaz had handpicked for the 1910 election. By doing this, Madero was true to his ideological commitment to constitutional democracy, but with members of the D\u00edaz regime still in power, he was caused difficulties in the short and long term. The German ambassador to Mexico, Paul von Hintze, who associated with the Interim President, said of him that \"De la Barra wants to accommodate himself with dignity to the inevitable advance of the ex-revolutionary influence, while accelerating the widespread collapse of the Madero party...\" Madero sought to be a moderate democrat and follow the course outlined in treaty bringing about exile of D\u00edaz, but by calling for the disarming and demobilization of his revolutionary base, he undermined his support. The Mexican Federal Army, just defeated by the revolutionaries, was to continue as the armed force of the Mexican state. Madero argued that the revolutionaries should henceforth proceed solely by peaceful means. In the south, revolutionary leader Emiliano Zapata was skeptical about disbanding his troops, especially since the Federal Army from the D\u00edaz era remained essentially intact. However, Madero traveled south to meet with Zapata at Cuernavaca and Cuautla, Morelos. Madero assured Zapata that the land redistribution promised in the Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed would be carried out when Madero became president.\nWith Madero now campaigning for the presidency, which he was expected to win, several landowners from Zapata's state of Morelos took advantage of his not being head of state and appealed to President De la Barra and the Congress to restore their lands which had been seized by Zapatista revolutionaries. They spread exaggerated stories of atrocities committed by Zapata's irregulars, calling Zapata the \"Attila of the South\". De la Barra and the Congress, therefore, decided to send regular troops under Victoriano Huerta to suppress Zapata's revolutionaries. Madero once again traveled south to urge Zapata to disband his supporters peacefully, but Zapata refused on the grounds that Huerta's troops were advancing on Yautepec. Zapata's suspicions proved accurate as Huerta's Federal soldiers moved violently into Yautepec. Madero wrote to De la Barra, saying that Huerta's actions were unjustified and recommending that Zapata's demands be met. However, when he left the south, he had achieved nothing. Nevertheless, he promised the Zapatistas that once he became president, things would change. Most Zapatistas had grown suspicious of Madero, however.\nMadero presidency (November 1911 \u2013 February 1913).\nMadero became president in November 1911, and, intending to reconcile the nation, appointed a cabinet which included many of Porfirio D\u00edaz's supporters. A curious fact is that almost immediately after taking office in November, Madero became the first head of state in the world to fly in an airplane, which the Mexican press was later to mock. Madero was unable to achieve the reconciliation he desired since conservative Porfirians had organized themselves during the interim presidency and now mounted a sustained and effective opposition to Madero's reform program. Conservatives in the Senate refused to pass the reforms he advocated. At the same time, several of Madero's allies denounced him for being overly conciliatory with the Porfirians and with not moving aggressively forward with reforms.\nAfter years of censorship, Mexican newspapers took advantage of their newly found freedom of the press to harshly criticize Madero's performance as president. Gustavo A. Madero, the president's brother, remarked that \"the newspapers bite the hand that took off their muzzle.\" President Madero refused the recommendation of some of his advisors that he bring back censorship. The press was particularly critical of Madero's handling of rebellions that broke out against his rule shortly after he became president.\nDespite internal and external opposition, the Madero administration had a number of important accomplishments, including freedom of the press. He freed political prisoners and abolished the death penalty. He did away with the practice of the D\u00edaz government, which appointed local political bosses (\"jefes pol\u00edticos\"), and instead set up a system of independent municipal authorities. State elections were free and fair. He was concerned about the improvement of education, establishing new schools and workshops. An important step was the creation of a federal department of labor, limited the workday to 10 hours, and set in place regulations on women's and children's labor. Unions were granted the right to freely organize. The \"Casa del Obrero Mundial\" (\"House of the World Worker\"), an organization with anarcho-syndicalist was founded during his presidency.\nMadero alienated a number of his political supporters when he created a new political party, the Constitutionalist Progressive party, which replaced the Anti-Reelectionist Party. He ousted leftist Emilio V\u00e1zquez G\u00f3mez from his cabinet, brother of Francisco V\u00e1zquez G\u00f3mez, whom Madero had replaced as his vice presidential candidate with Pino Su\u00e1rez.\nRebellions.\nMadero retained the Mexican Federal Army and ordered the demobilization of revolutionary forces. For revolutionaries who considered themselves the reason that D\u00edaz resigned, this was a hard course to follow. Since Madero did not implement immediate, radical reforms that many of those had supported him had expected, he lost control of those areas in Morelos and Chihuahua. A series of internal rebellions challenged Madero's presidency before the February 1913 coup that deposed him.\nZapatista rebellion.\nIn Morelos, Emiliano Zapata proclaimed the Plan of Ayala on 25 November 1911, which excoriated Madero's slowness on land reform. Zapata's plan recognized Pascual Orozco as fellow revolutionary, although Orozco was for the moment loyal to Madero, until 1912.\nReyes rebellion.\nIn December 1911, Bernardo Reyes (the popular general whom Porfirio D\u00edaz had sent to Europe on a diplomatic mission because D\u00edaz worried that Reyes was going to challenge him for the presidency) launched a rebellion in Nuevo Le\u00f3n, where he had previously served as governor. Reyes's rebellion lasted only eleven days before Reyes surrendered at Linares, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, and was sent to the Santiago Tlatelolco prison in Mexico City.\nOrozco rebellion.\nIn March 1912, Madero's former general Pascual Orozco, who was personally resentful of how President Madero had treated him once he was in office, launched a rebellion in Chihuahua with the financial backing of Luis Terrazas, a former Governor of Chihuahua who was the largest landowner in Mexico. Madero dispatched troops under General Jos\u00e9 Gonz\u00e1lez Salas to put down the rebellion, but they were initially defeated by Orozco's troops. Gonz\u00e1lez Salas committed suicide and General Victoriano Huerta assumed control of the federalist forces. Huerta was more successful, defeating Orozco's troops in three major battles and forcing Orozco to flee to the United States in September 1912.\nRelations between Huerta and Madero grew strained during the course of this campaign when Pancho Villa, the commander of the \"Divisi\u00f3n del Norte\", refused orders from General Huerta. Huerta ordered Villa's execution, but Madero commuted the sentence and Villa was sent to the same Santiago Tlatelolco prison as Reyes from which he escaped on Christmas Day 1912. Angry at Madero's commutation of Villa's sentence, Huerta, after a long night of drinking, mused about reaching an agreement with Orozco and together deposing Madero as president. When Mexico's Minister of War learned of General Huerta's comments, he stripped Huerta of his command, but Madero intervened and restored Huerta to command.\nF\u00e9lix D\u00edaz rebellion.\nOctober 1912, F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz (nephew of Porfirio D\u00edaz) launched a rebellion in Veracruz, \"to reclaim the honor of the army trampled by Madero.\" This rebellion was quickly crushed and F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz was imprisoned. Madero was prepared to have F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz executed, but the Supreme Court of Mexico declared that F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz would be imprisoned, but not executed.\nTen Tragic Days and death of Madero.\nIn early 1913, General F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz (Porfirio D\u00edaz's nephew) and General Bernardo Reyes plotted the overthrow of Madero. Now known in Mexican history as the Ten Tragic Days, from 9 February to 19 February events in the capital led to the overthrow and murder of Madero and his vice president. Rebel forces bombarded the National Palace and downtown Mexico City from the military arsenal (\"ciudadela\"). Madero's loyalists initially held their ground, but Madero's commander, General Victoriano Huerta secretly switched sides to support the rebels. Madero's decision to appoint General Victoriano Huerta as commander of forces in Mexico City was one \"for which he would pay for with his life.\" Madero and his vice president were arrested. Under pressure Madero resigned the presidency, with the expectation that he would go into exile, as had President D\u00edaz in May 1911. Madero's brother and advisor Gustavo A. Madero was kidnapped off the street, tortured, and killed. Following Huerta's coup d'\u00e9tat on 18 February 1913, Madero was forced to resign. After a 45-minute term of office, Pedro Lascur\u00e1in was replaced by Huerta, who took over the presidency later that day.\nFollowing his forced resignation, Madero and his Vice-President Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Pino Su\u00e1rez were kept under guard in the National Palace. On the evening of 22 February, they were told that they were to be transferred to the main city penitentiary, where they would be safer. At 11:15\u00a0pm, reporters waiting outside the National Palace saw two cars containing Madero and Su\u00e1rez emerge from the main gate under a heavy escort commanded by Major Francisco C\u00e1rdenas, an officer of the rurales. The journalists on foot were outdistanced by the motor vehicles, which were driven towards the penitentiary. The correspondent for the \"New York World\" was approaching the prison when he heard a volley of shots. Behind the building, he found the two cars with the bodies of Madero and Su\u00e1rez nearby, surrounded by soldiers and gendarmes. Major C\u00e1rdenas subsequently told reporters that the cars and their escort had been fired on by a group, as they neared the penitentiary. The two prisoners had leapt from the vehicles and ran towards their presumed rescuers. They had however been killed in the cross-fire. This account was treated with general disbelief, although the American ambassador Henry Lane Wilson, a strong supporter of Huerta, reported to Washington that, \"I am disposed to accept the (Huerta) government's version of the affair and consider it a closed incident\".\nPresident Madero, dead at 39, was buried quietly in the French cemetery of Mexico City. A series of contemporary photographs taken by Manuel Ramos show Maderos's coffin being carried from the penitentiary and placed on a special funeral tram car for transportation to the cemetery. Only his close family were permitted to attend, leaving for Cuba immediately after. Following Huerta's overthrow, Francisco C\u00e1rdenas fled to Guatemala where he committed suicide in 1920 after the new Mexican government had requested his extradition to stand trial for the murder of Madero.\nAftermath of coup.\nThere was shock at Madero's murder, but there were many, Mexican elites and foreign entrepreneurs and governments, who saw the coup and the emergence of Victoriano Huerta as the desired strongman to return order to Mexico. Among elites in Mexico, Madero's death was a cause of rejoicing, seeing the time since D\u00edaz's resignation as one of political instability and economic uncertainty. Ordinary Mexicans in the capital, however, were dismayed by the coup, since many considered Madero a friend, but their feelings did not translate into concrete action against the Huerta regime. In northern Mexico, Madero's overthrow and martyrdom united forces against Huerta's usurpation of power. Governor of Coahuila, Venustiano Carranza refused to support the new regime although most state governors had. He brought together a coalition of revolutionaries under the banner of the Mexican Constitution, so that the Constitutionalist Army fought for the principles of constitutional democracry that Madero embraced. In southern Mexico, Zapata had been in rebellion against the Madero government for its slow action on land reform and continued in rebellion against the Huerta regime. However, Zapata repudiated his former high opinion of fellow revolutionary Pascual Orozco, who had also rebelled against Madero, when Orozco allied with Huerta. Madero's anti-reelectionist movement had mobilized revolutionary action that led to the resignation of D\u00edaz. Madero's overthrow and murder during the Ten Tragic Days was a prelude to further years of civil war.\nHistorical memory and popular culture.\nMadero was known as \"The Apostle of Democracy,\" but \"Madero the martyr meant more to the soul of Mexico.\"\nDespite Madero's importance as a historical figure, there are relatively few memorials or monuments to him. It was not until the Monument to the Revolution was completed in 1938 that Madero had a public resting place. He had been interred in the French cemetery in Mexico City. After his death. His tomb had been an informal pilgrimage site on the anniversary of his murder (22 February) and the proclamation of his Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed (20 November), which launched the Mexican Revolution. Initially, the monument to the Revolution held the remains of Madero, Carranza, and Villa and was planned as a collective commemoration of the Revolution, not individual revolutionaries. Although it was completed on 20 November 1938, there was no inaugural ceremony.\nThe date of Madero's Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed, 20 November, was a fixed official holiday in Mexico, Revolution Day, but a 2005 change in the law makes the third Monday in November the day of commemoration. During the Presidency of Venustiano Carranza, he ignored 20 November and commemorated 26 March, the anniversary of his Plan de Guadalupe.\nThe Mexico City Metro has a stop named for Madero's vice president, Metro Pino Su\u00e1rez, but not one to Madero. General Alvaro Obreg\u00f3n laid a foundation stone on the 10th anniversary of Madero's death of a planned Madero statue in the z\u00f3calo, but the statue was never built. A statue was erected in 1956 at a downtown intersection in Mexico City and has been moved to the presidential residence, Los Pinos, not easily viewable by the public. An exception is Avenida Madero in Mexico City. One contemporaneous honor by General Pancho Villa remains in Mexico City. On the morning of 8 December 1914, he declared that the street leading from the Z\u00f3calo in Mexico City towards the Paseo de la Reforma would be named for Madero. Still officially called Francisco I. Madero Avenue, but commonly known simply as Madero street, it is one of the most popular and historically significant streets in the city. It was pedestrianised in 2009.\nMexican artist Jos\u00e9 Guadalupe Posada created an etching for a broadside, produced on the occasion of Madero's election in 1910, titled \"Calavera de Madero\" portraying Madero as a calavera.\nMadero appears in the films \"Viva Villa!\" (1934), \"Villa Rides\" (1968) and \"Viva Zapata!\" (1952).\nIn the novel \"The Friends of Pancho Villa\" (1996) by James Carlos Blake, Madero is a major character."}
{"id": "11286", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11286", "title": "Fruitarianism", "text": "Fruitarianism () is a subset of dietary veganism that consists of a diet of entirely or primarily fruits in the botanical sense, and possibly nuts and seeds, but without animal products. Fruitarian diets are subject to numerous criticisms and health concerns.\nFruitarianism may be adopted for different reasons, including ethical, religious, environmental, cultural, economic, and health. There are several varieties of the diet. Some people with a diet consisting of 75% or more fruit may consider themselves fruitarians.\nThe health benefits of a fruitarian diet is not supported by scientific evidence; in fact, the diet increases the risk of nutritional deficiencies such as vitamin B12, calcium, iron, zinc, omega-3 and protein. \nVarieties.\nSome fruitarians will eat only what falls (or would fall) naturally from a plant: that is, plant foods that can be harvested without killing or harming the plant. These foods consist primarily of culinary fruits, nuts, and seeds. According to author Adam Gollner, some fruitarians eat only fallen fruit. Some do not eat grains, believing it is unnatural to do so, and some fruitarians feel that it is improper for humans to eat seeds as they contain future plants, or nuts and seeds, or any food besides juicy fruit. Others believe they should eat only plants that spread seeds when the plant is eaten. Others eat seeds and some cooked foods. Some fruitarians use the botanical definitions of fruits and consume pulses, such as beans, peas, or other legumes. Other fruitarians' diets include raw fruits, dried fruits, nuts, honey and olive oil, nuts, beans and/or chocolate.\nIdeology and diet.\nSome fruitarians wish, like Jains, to avoid killing anything, including plants, and refer to ahimsa fruitarianism. For some fruitarians, the motivation comes from a fixation on a utopian past, their hope being to return to a past that pre-dates an agrarian society to when humans were simply gatherers. Another common motivation is the desire to eliminate perceived toxicity from within the body. For others, the appeal of a fruitarian diet comes from the challenge that the restrictive nature of this diet provides.\nNutrition.\nAccording to nutritionists, adults must be careful not to follow a fruit-only diet for too long. A fruitarian diet is wholly unsuitable for children (including teens), nursing mothers and their babies. Death can result from malnutrition.\nNutritional effects.\nFruitarianism is even more restrictive than veganism or raw veganism. Maintaining this diet over a long period can result in dangerous deficiencies, a risk that many fruitarians try to ward off through nutritional testing and vitamin injections. The Health Promotion Program at Columbia University reports that a fruitarian diet can cause deficiencies in calcium, protein, iron, zinc, vitamin D, most B vitamins (especially B12), and essential fatty acids.\nAlthough fruit provides a source of carbohydrates, they have very little protein, and because protein cannot be stored in the body as fat and carbohydrates can, fruitarians need to be careful that they consume enough protein each day. When the body does not take in enough protein, it misses out on amino acids, which are essential to making body proteins which support the growth and maintenance of body tissues. Consuming high levels of fruit also poses a risk to those who are diabetic or pre-diabetic, due to the negative effect that the large amounts of sugar in fruits has on blood sugar levels. These high levels of sugar mean that fruitarians are at high risk for tooth decay. Another concern that fruitarianism presents is that because fruit is easily digested, the body burns through meals quickly, and is hungry again soon after eating. A side effect of the digestibility is that the body will defecate more frequently.\nAdditionally, the Health Promotion Program at Columbia reports that food restrictions in general may lead to hunger, cravings, food obsessions, social disruptions, and social isolation. The severe dietary restrictions inherent in a fruitarian regime also carries the serious risk of triggering orthorexia nervosa.\nHarriet Hall has written that a fruitarian diet \"leads to nutritional deficiencies, especially in children. Fruitarians can develop protein energy malnutrition, anemia, and low levels of iron, calcium, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.\"\nVitamin B12.\nVitamin B12, a bacterial product, cannot be obtained from fruits. According to the U.S. National Institutes of Health \"natural food sources of vitamin B12 are limited to foods that come from animals.\" Like raw vegans who do not consume B12-fortified foods (for example, certain plant milks and some breakfast cereals), fruitarians may need to include a B12 supplement in their diet or risk vitamin B12 deficiency.\nGrowth and development issues.\nIn children, growth and development may be at risk. Some nutritionists state that children should not follow a fruitarian diet. Nutritional problems include severe protein\u2013energy malnutrition, anemia and deficiencies including protein, iron, calcium, essential fatty acids, raw fibre and a wide range of vitamins and minerals.\nNotable adherents.\nSome notable advocates of fruitarianism, or of diets which may be considered fruitarian, or of lifestyles including such a diet, are:\nIn popular culture.\nThe minor character Keziah in the 1999 film \"Notting Hill\", (played by Emma Bernard) tells William \"Will\" Thacker (Hugh Grant) that she is a fruitarian. She says she believes that \"fruits and vegetables have feeling,\" meaning she opposes cooking them, only eating things that have \"actually fallen off a tree or bush\" and that are dead already, leading to what some describe as a negative depiction."}
{"id": "11288", "revid": "33152287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11288", "title": "Foreign relations of Afghanistan", "text": "Foreign relations of Afghanistan are handled by the nation's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is headed by Mohammad Hanif Atmar. He answers to, and receives guidance from, the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani.\nThe Islamic Republic of Afghanistan has close and friendly relations with a number of countries around the world, including: Turkey, United States, United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, Spain, South Korea, Italy, India, China, Canada, United Arab Emirates and many others.\nOverview.\nBefore the Soviet invasion, Afghanistan pursued a policy of neutrality and nonalignment rein its foreign relations, being one of a few independent nations to stay neutral in both World War I and World War II. In international forums, Afghanistan generally followed the voting patterns of Asian and African non-aligned countries. During the 1950s and 1960s, Afghanistan was able to use the Russian and American need for allies during the Cold War as a way to receive economic assistance from both countries. However, given that unlike Russia, America refused to give extensive military aid to the country, the government of Daoud Khan developed warmer ties with the USSR while officially remaining non-aligned. Following the coup of April 1978, the government under Nur Muhammad Taraki developed significantly closer ties with the Soviet Union and its communist satellites.\nAfter the December 1979 Soviet invasion, Afghanistan's foreign policy mirrored that of the Soviet Union. Afghan foreign policymakers attempted, with little success, to increase their regime's low standing in the noncommunist world. With the signing of the Geneva Accords, President Najibullah unsuccessfully sought to end the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan's isolation within the Islamic world and in the Non-Aligned Movement.\nMost Western countries, including the United States, maintained small diplomatic missions in the capital city of Kabul during the Soviet occupation. Many countries subsequently closed their missions due to instability and heavy fighting in Kabul after the Soviet withdrawal in 1989.\nMany countries initially welcomed the introduction of the Taliban regime, who they saw as a stabilising, law-enforcing alternative to the warlords who had ruled the country since the fall of Najibullah's government in 1992. The Taliban soon became alienated of those countries' positive feelings with knowledge of the harsh Sharia law being enforced in Taliban-controlled territories spreading around the world. The brutality towards women who attempted to work, learn, or leave the house without a male escort caused outside aid to the war-torn country to be limited.\nFollowing the October 2001 American invasion and the Bonn Agreement the new government under the leadership of Hamid Karzai started to re-establish diplomatic relationships with many countries who had held close diplomatic relations before the communist coup d'\u00e9tat and the subsequent civil war.\nThe Afghan government is focused on securing continued assistance for rebuilding the economy, infrastructure, and military of the country. It has continued to maintain close ties with North America, the European Union, South Korea, Japan, Australia, India, China, Russia and the Greater Middle East as well as African nations. It also seeks to establish relations with more South American or Latin American nations. In late 2011, relations between Afghanistan and Dominican Republic were established.\nUnited Nations.\nDuring the Soviet occupation, the United Nations was highly critical of the U.S.S.R.'s interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and was instrumental in obtaining a negotiated Soviet withdrawal under the terms of the Geneva Accords.\nIn the aftermath of the Accords and subsequent Soviet withdrawal, the United Nations has assisted in the repatriation of refugees and has provided humanitarian aid such as health care, educational programs, and food and has supported mine-clearing operations. The UNDP and associated agencies have undertaken a limited number of development projects. However, the UN reduced its role in Afghanistan in 1992 in the wake of fierce factional strife in and around Kabul. The UN Secretary General has designated a personal representative to head the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to Afghanistan (UNOCHA) and the Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA), both based in Islamabad, Pakistan. Throughout the late 1990s, 2000, and 2001, the UN unsuccessfully strived to promote a peaceful settlement between the Afghan factions as well as provide humanitarian aid, this despite increasing Taliban restrictions upon UN personnel and agencies."}
{"id": "11289", "revid": "404133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11289", "title": "Feudal Polish crown", "text": ""}
{"id": "11291", "revid": "36458973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11291", "title": "Floccinaucinihilipilification", "text": " "}
{"id": "11293", "revid": "1013068241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11293", "title": "Felony", "text": "A felony is traditionally considered a crime of high seriousness, whereas a misdemeanor is regarded as less serious. The term \"felony\" originated from English common law (from the French medieval word \"f\u00e9lonie\") to describe an offense that resulted in the confiscation of a convicted person's land and goods, to which additional punishments including capital punishment could be added; other crimes were called misdemeanors. Following conviction of a felony in a court of law, a person may be described as a convicted felon/felon. The centuries-old stigma of loss of wealth, status and speculated extreme gravity of the crime sees those personal descriptions widely deprecated, as opposed to \"ex-convict\" or \"ex-criminal.\"\nSome common law countries and jurisdictions no longer classify crimes as felonies or misdemeanors and instead use other distinctions, such as by classifying serious crimes as indictable offences and less serious crimes as summary offences.\nIn the United States, where the felony/misdemeanor distinction is still widely applied, the federal government defines a felony as a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year. If punishable by exactly one year or less, it is classified as a misdemeanor. The classification is based upon a crime's potential sentence, so a crime remains classified as a felony even if a defendant receives a sentence of less than a year of incarceration. Individual states may classify crimes by other factors, such as seriousness or context.\nIn some civil law jurisdictions, such as Italy and Spain, the term \"delict\" is used to describe serious offenses, a category similar to common law felony. In other nations, such as Germany, France, Belgium, and Switzerland, more serious offenses are described as \"crimes\", while \"misdemeanors\" or \"delicts\" (or d\u00e9lits) are less serious. In still others (such as Brazil and Portugal), \"crimes\" and \"delicts\" are synonymous (more serious) and are opposed to contraventions (less serious).\nOverview.\nClassification by subject matter.\nFelonies may include but are not limited to the following:\nBroadly, felonies can be characterized as either violent or nonviolent:\nSome offenses, though similar in nature, may be felonies or misdemeanors depending on the circumstances. For example, the illegal manufacture, distribution or possession of controlled substances may be a felony, although possession of small amounts may be only a misdemeanor. Possession of a deadly weapon may be generally legal, but carrying the same weapon into a restricted area such as a school may be viewed as a serious offense, regardless of whether there is intent to use the weapon. Additionally, driving under the influence in some states may be a misdemeanor if a first offense, but a felony on subsequent offenses.\nClassification by seriousness.\nA felony may be punishable with imprisonment for two or more years or death in the case of the most serious felonies, such as murder. Indeed, historically at common law, felonies were crimes punishable by either death or forfeiture of property. All felonies remain a serious crime, but concerns of proportionality (i.e., that the punishment fit the crime) have in modern times prompted legislatures to require or permit the imposition of less serious punishments, ranging from lesser terms of imprisonment to the substitution of a jail sentence or even the suspension of all incarceration contingent upon a defendant's successful completion of probation. Standards for measurement of an offense's seriousness include attempts to quantitatively estimate and compare the effects of a crime upon its specific victims or upon society generally.\nIn some states, all or most felonies are placed into one of various classes according to their seriousness and their potential punishment upon conviction. The number of classifications and the corresponding crimes vary by state and are determined by the legislature. Usually, the legislature also determines the maximum punishment allowable for each felony class; doing so avoids the necessity of defining specific sentences for every possible crime. For example:\nEngland and Wales.\nHistory.\nSir William Blackstone wrote that felony \"comprises every species of crime, which occasioned at common law the forfeiture of lands or goods\". The word \"felony\" was feudal in origin, denoting the value of a man's entire property: \"the consideration for which a man gives up his fief\". Blackstone refutes the misconception that felony simply means an offence punishable by death, by demonstrating that not every felony is capital, and not every capital offence is a felony. However he concedes that \"the idea of felony is indeed so generally connected with that of capital punishment, that we find it hard to separate them; and to this usage the interpretations of the law do now conform.\"\nThe death penalty for felony could be avoided by pleading benefit of clergy, which gradually evolved to exempt everybody (whether clergy or not) from that punishment for a first offence, except for high treason and offences expressly excluded by statute. During the 19th century criminal law reform incrementally reduced the number of capital offences to five \"(see capital punishment in the United Kingdom)\", and forfeiture for felony was abolished by the Forfeiture Act 1870. Consequently, the distinction between felony and misdemeanour became increasingly arbitrary. The surviving differences consisted of different rules of evidence and procedure, and the Law Commission recommended that felonies be abolished altogether. This was done by the Criminal Law Act 1967, which made all felonies (except treason) misdemeanours, and introduced a new system of classifying crimes as either \"arrestable\" and \"non-arrestable\" offences (according to which a general power of arrest was available for crimes punishable by five years' imprisonment or more).\nArrestable offences were abolished in 2006, and today crimes are classified as indictable or summary offences.\nProcedure.\nThe Trials for Felony Act 1836 (6 &amp; 7 Will. 4 c. 114) allowed persons indicted for felonies to be represented by counsel or attorney.\nTerminology.\nA person being prosecuted for this was called a prisoner, though increasing an \"accused\" or \"defendant\" was preferred.\nIreland.\nIn the law of the Republic of Ireland the distinction between felony and misdemeanor was abolished by section 3 of the Criminal Law Act, 1997, such that the law previously applied to misdemeanours was extended to all offences. Minister Joan Burton, introducing the bill in the Seanad, said \"The distinction has been eroded over many years and in today's conditions has no real relevance. Today, for example, serious offences such as fraudulent conversion and obtaining property by false pretences are classified as misdemeanours whereas a relatively trivial offence such as stealing a bar of chocolate is a felony.\" The 1997 Act, modelled on the English Criminal Law Act 1967, introduced the category of \"arrestable offence\" for those with penalties of five years' imprisonment or greater.\nThe 1937 Constitution declares that the parliamentary privilege, which protects Oireachtas members from arrest travelling to or from the legislature, does not apply to \"treason, felony, and breach of the peace\". The 1996 Constitutional Review Group recommended replacing \"felony\" with \"serious criminal offence\".\nUnited States.\nThe reform of harsh felony laws that had originated in Great Britain was deemed \"one of the first fruits of liberty\" after the United States became independent.\nIn many parts of the United States, a felon can face long-term legal consequences persisting after the end of their imprisonment.\nThe status and designation as a \"felon\" is considered permanent, and is not extinguished upon sentence completion even if parole, probation or early release was given. The status can be cleared only by a successful appeal or executive clemency. However, felons may qualify for restoration of some rights after a certain period of time has passed.\nThe consequences felons face in most states include:\nAdditionally, many job applications and rental applications ask about felony history (with the exception of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts) and answering dishonestly on them can be grounds for rejecting the application, or termination if the lie is discovered after hire. Convicted felons may not be eligible for certain professional licenses or bonds, or may raise the cost of an employer's insurance. \nIt is broadly legal to discriminate against felons in hiring decisions as well as the decision to rent housing to a person, so felons can face barriers to finding both jobs and housing. Many landlords will not rent to felons, although a blanket ban on renting to felons may violate federal housing law. A common term of parole is to avoid associating with other felons. In some neighborhoods with high rates of felony conviction, this creates a situation where many felons live with a constant threat of being arrested for violating parole. Banks may refuse to issue loans to felons, and a felony conviction may prevent employment in banking or finance.\nIn some states, restoration of those rights depends on repayment of various fees associated with the felon's arrest, processing, and prison stay, such as restitution to victims, or outstanding fines.\nRestoration of rights.\nThe primary means of restoring civil rights that are lost as a result of a felony conviction are executive clemency and expungement.\nFor state law convictions, expungement is determined by the law of the state. Many states do not allow expungement, regardless of the offense, though felons can seek pardons and clemency, potentially including restoration of rights.\nFederal law does not have any provisions for persons convicted of federal felonies in a federal United States district court to apply to have their record expunged. At present the only relief that an individual convicted of a felony in federal court may receive is a presidential pardon, which does not expunge the conviction, but rather grants relief from the civil disabilities that stem from it.\nGermany.\nFelonies (\"Verbrechen\") are defined as a crime that is punishable with a minimum of one year's imprisonment. Misdemeanours (\"Vergehen\") are all other crimes punishable by imprisonment with a minimum of less than one year or by fine.\nHowever, in some cases a severe version misdemeanor may be punished with imprisonment of more than one year, yet the crime itself remains considered a misdemeanor. Same applies for a milder version of a felony that is punishable with imprisonment less than a year.\nAn attempt to commit a felony is always punishable, whilst an attempt to commit a misdemeanor is solely punishable if particularly prescribed by law."}
{"id": "11295", "revid": "22132037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11295", "title": "Ferdinand of Habsburg", "text": "Ferdinand of Habsburg may refer to:"}
{"id": "11296", "revid": "40917049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11296", "title": "First aid", "text": "First aid is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from worsening, or to promote recovery. It includes initial intervention in a serious condition prior to professional medical help being available, such as performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) while waiting for an ambulance, as well as the complete treatment of minor conditions, such as applying a plaster to a cut. First aid is generally performed by someone with basic medical training. Mental health first aid is an extension of the concept of first aid to cover mental health, while psychological first aid is used as early treatment of people who are at risk for developing PTSD. Conflict First Aid, focused on preservation and recovery of an individual's social or relationship well-being, is being piloted in Canada.\nThere are many situations that may require first aid, and many countries have legislation, regulation, or guidance which specifies a minimum level of first aid provision in certain circumstances. This can include specific training or equipment to be available in the workplace (such as an automated external defibrillator), the provision of specialist first aid cover at public gatherings, or mandatory first aid training within schools. First aid, however, does not necessarily require any particular equipment or prior knowledge, and can involve improvisation with materials available at the time, often by untrained people.\nFirst aid can be performed on nearly all animals, such as pets, although this article relates to the care of human patients.\nEarly history and warfare.\nSkills of what is now known as first aid have been recorded throughout history, especially in relation to warfare, where the care of both traumatic and medical cases is required in particularly large numbers. The bandaging of battle wounds is shown on Classical Greek pottery from c. 500 BC, whilst the parable of the Good Samaritan includes references to binding or dressing wounds. There are numerous references to first aid performed within the Roman army, with a system of first aid supported by surgeons, field ambulances, and hospitals. Roman legions had the specific role of capsarii, who were responsible for first aid such as bandaging, and are the forerunners of the modern combat medic.\nFurther examples occur through history, still mostly related to battle, with examples such as the Knights Hospitaller in the 11th century AD, providing care to pilgrims and knights in the Holy Land.\nFormalization of life saving treatments.\nDuring the late 18th century, drowning as a cause of death was a major concern amongst the population. In 1767, a society for the preservation of life from accidents in water was started in Amsterdam, and in 1773, physician William Hawes began publicizing the power of artificial respiration as means of resuscitation of those who appeared drowned. This led to the formation, in 1774, of the Society for the Recovery of Persons Apparently Drowned, later the Royal Humane Society, who did much to promote resuscitation.\nNapoleon's surgeon, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, is credited with creating an ambulance corps (the ambulance volantes), which included medical assistants, tasked to administer first aid in battle.\nIn 1859 Jean-Henri Dunant witnessed the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino, and his work led to the formation of the Red Cross, with a key stated aim of \"aid to sick and wounded soldiers in the field\". The Red Cross and Red Crescent are still the largest provider of first aid worldwide.\nIn 1870, Prussian military surgeon Friedrich von Esmarch introduced formalized first aid to the military, and first coined the term \"erste hilfe\" (translating to 'first aid'), including training for soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War on care for wounded comrades using pre-learnt bandaging and splinting skills, and making use of the Esmarch bandage which he designed. The bandage was issued as standard to the Prussian combatants, and also included aide-memoire pictures showing common uses.\nIn 1872, the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem in England changed its focus from hospice care, and set out to start a system of practical medical help, starting with making a grant towards the establishment of the UK's first ambulance service. This was followed by creating its own wheeled transport litter in 1875 (the St John Ambulance), and in 1877 established the St John Ambulance Association (the forerunner of modern-day St John Ambulance) \"to train men and women for the benefit of the sick and wounded\".\nAlso in the UK, Surgeon-Major Peter Shepherd had seen the advantages of von Esmarch's new teaching of first aid, and introduced an equivalent programme for the British Army, and so being the first user of \"first aid for the injured\" in English, disseminating information through a series of lectures. Following this, in 1878, Shepherd and Colonel Francis Duncan took advantage of the newly charitable focus of St John, and established the concept of teaching first aid skills to civilians. The first classes were conducted in the hall of the Presbyterian school in Woolwich (near Woolwich barracks where Shepherd was based) using a comprehensive first aid curriculum.\nFirst aid training began to spread through the British Empire through organisations such as St John, often starting, as in the UK, with high risk activities such as ports and railways.\nAims.\nThe primary goal of first aid is to prevent death or serious injury from worsening. The key aims of first aid can be summarized with the acronym of 'the three Ps':\nIt is important to note that first aid is not medical treatment and cannot be compared with what a trained medical professional provides. First aid involves making common sense decisions in the best interest of an injured person.\nSetting the priorities.\nProtocols such as ATLS, BATLS, SAFE-POINT are based on the principle of defining the priorities and the procedure where the correct execution of the individual steps achieves the required objective of saving human life. Basic points of these protocols include:\nA major benefit of these protocols is that they require minimum resources, time and skills with a great degree of success in saving lives under conditions unfavourable for applying first aid.\nABCDE method.\nImportantly, high-flow oxygen should be provided to all critically ill persons as soon as possible.\nKey skills.\nCertain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are taught ubiquitously. Particularly the \"ABC\"s of first aid, which focus on critical life-saving intervention, must be rendered before treatment of less serious injuries. ABC stands for \"Airway\", \"Breathing\", and \"Circulation\". The same mnemonic is used by emergency health professionals. Attention must first be brought to the airway to ensure it is clear. Obstruction (choking) is a life-threatening emergency. Following evaluation of the airway, a first aid attendant would determine adequacy of breathing and provide rescue breathing if necessary.\nAssessment of circulation is now not usually carried out for patients who are not breathing, with first aiders now trained to go straight to chest compressions (and thus providing artificial circulation) but pulse checks may be done on less serious patients.\nSome organizations add a fourth step of \"D\" for \"Deadly bleeding\" or \"Defibrillation\", while others consider this as part of the \"Circulation\" step simply referred as Disability. Variations on techniques to evaluate and maintain the ABCs depend on the skill level of the first aider. Once the ABCs are secured, first aiders can begin additional treatments or examination, as required if they possess the proper training (such as measuring pupil dilation). Some organizations teach the same order of priority using the \"3Bs\": \"Breathing\", \"Bleeding\", and \"Bones\" (or \"4Bs\": \"Breathing\", \"Bleeding\", \"Burns\", and \"Bones\"). While the ABCs and 3Bs are taught to be performed sequentially, certain conditions may require the consideration of two steps simultaneously. This includes the provision of both artificial respiration and chest compressions to someone who is not breathing and has no pulse, and the consideration of cervical spine injuries when ensuring an open airway.\nPreserving life.\nThe patient must have an open airway\u2014that is, an unobstructed passage that allows air to travel from the open mouth or uncongested nose, down through the pharynx and into the lungs. Conscious people maintain their own airway automatically, but those who are unconscious (with a GCS of less than 8) may be unable to do so, as the part of the brain that manages spontaneous breathing may not be functioning.\nWhether conscious or not, the patient may be placed in the recovery position, laying on their side. In addition to relaxing the patient, this can have the effect of clearing the tongue from the pharynx. It also avoids a common cause of death in unconscious patients, which is choking on regurgitated stomach contents.\nThe airway can also become blocked by a foreign object. To dislodge the object and prevent choking, the first aider may use techniques such as \u2018back slaps\u2019 and \u2018abdominal thrusts\u2019.\nOnce the airway has been opened, the first aider would reassess the patient's breathing. If there is no breathing, or the patient is not breathing normally (e.g. agonal breathing), the first aider would initiate CPR, which attempts to restart the patient's breathing by forcing air into the lungs. They may also manually massage the heart to promote blood flow around the body.\nIf the choking person is an infant, the procedure is to deliver five strong blows on the infant's upper back after placing the infant's face in the aider's forearm. If the infant is able to cough or cry, no breathing assistance should be given. Coughing and crying indicate the airway is open and the foreign object will likely to come out from the force the coughing or crying produces.\nA first responder should know how to use an Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) in the case of a person having a sudden cardiac arrest. The survival rate of those who suffer a cardiac arrest outside of the hospital is low. Permanent brain damage sets in after 5 minutes of no oxygen delivery, so rapid action on the part of the rescuer is necessary. An AED is a device that can examine a heartbeat and produce electric shocks to restart the heart.\nA first aider should be prepared to quickly deal with less severe problems such as cuts, grazes or bone fracture. They may be able to completely resolve a situation if they have the proper training and equipment. For situations that are more severe, complex or dangerous, a first aider might need to do the best they can with the equipment they have, and wait for an ambulance to arrive at the scene.\nTraining Principles.\nBasic principles, such as knowing the use of adhesive bandage or applying direct pressure on a bleed, are often acquired passively through life experiences. However, to provide effective, life-saving first aid interventions requires instruction and practical training. This is especially true where it relates to potentially fatal illnesses and injuries, such as those that require CPR; these procedures may be invasive, and carry a risk of further injury to the patient and the provider. As with any training, it is more useful if it occurs \"before\" an actual emergency, and in many countries, emergency ambulance dispatchers may give basic first aid instructions over the phone while the ambulance is on the way.\nTraining is generally provided by attending a course, typically leading to certification. Due to regular changes in procedures and protocols, based on updated clinical knowledge, and to maintain skill, attendance at regular refresher courses or re-certification is often necessary. First aid training is often available through community organizations such as the Red Cross and St. John Ambulance, or through commercial providers, who will train people for a fee. This commercial training is most common for training of employees to perform first aid in their workplace. Many community organizations also provide a commercial service, which complements their community programmes.\n1.Junior level certificate Basic Life Support\n2.Senior level certificate\n3.Special certificate\nTypes of first aid which require training.\nThere are several types of first aid (and first aider) that require specific additional training. These are usually undertaken to fulfill the demands of the work or activity undertaken.\nFirst aid services.\nSome people undertake specific training in order to provide first aid at public or private events, during filming, or other places where people gather. They may be designated as a first aider, or use some other title. This role may be undertaken on a voluntary basis, with organisations such as the \n1.Red Cross society and \n2.St John Ambulance, or as paid employment with a medical contractor.\nPeople performing a first aid role, whether in a professional or voluntary capacity, are often expected to have a high level of first aid training and are often uniformed.\nSymbols.\nAlthough commonly associated with first aid, the symbol of a red cross is an official protective symbol of the Red Cross. According to the Geneva Conventions and other international laws, the use of this and similar symbols is reserved for official agencies of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent, and as a protective emblem for medical personnel and facilities in combat situations. Use by any other person or organization is illegal, and may lead to prosecution.\nThe internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a green background shown below.\nSome organizations may make use of the Star of Life, although this is usually reserved for use by ambulance services, or may use symbols such as the Maltese Cross, like the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and St John Ambulance. Other symbols may also be used.\nPhysical conditions that often require first aid.\n\"Also see Medical emergency.\"\nMany accidents can happen in homes, offices, schools and laboratories which require immediate attention before the patient is attended by the doctor.\nFirst aid kits.\nA first aid kit consists of a strong, durable bag or transparent plastic box. They are commonly identified with a white cross on a green background. A first aid kit does not have to be bought ready-made. The advantage of ready-made first aid kits are that they have well organized compartments and familiar layouts.\nContents.\nThere is no universal agreement upon the list for the contents of a first aid kit. The UK Health and Safety Executive stress that the contents of workplace first aid kits will vary according to the nature of the work activities. As an example of possible contents of a kit, British Standard \"BS 8599 First Aid Kits for the Workplace\" lists the following items:"}
{"id": "11298", "revid": "128551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11298", "title": "Feudalism", "text": "Feudalism, also known as the feudal system, was a combination of the legal, economic, military, and cultural customs that flourished in Medieval Europe between the 9th and 15th centuries. Broadly defined, it was a way of structuring society around relationships that were derived from the holding of land in exchange for service or labor.\nAlthough it is derived from the Latin word \"feodum\" or \"feudum\" (fief), which was used during the Medieval period, the term \"feudalism\" and the system which it describes were not conceived of as a formal political system by the people who lived during the Middle Ages. The classic definition, by Fran\u00e7ois-Louis Ganshof (1944), describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility and revolved around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs.\nA broader definition of feudalism, as described by Marc Bloch (1939), includes not only the obligations of the warrior nobility but the obligations of all three estates of the realm: the nobility, the clergy, and the peasantry, all of whom were bound by a system of manorialism; this is sometimes referred to as a \"feudal society\". Since the publication of Elizabeth A. R. Brown's \"The Tyranny of a Construct\" (1974) and Susan Reynolds's \"Fiefs and Vassals\" (1994), there has been ongoing inconclusive discussion among medieval historians as to whether feudalism is a useful construct for understanding medieval society.\nDefinition.\nThere is no commonly accepted modern definition of feudalism, at least among scholars. The adjective \"feudal\" was in use by at least 1405, and the noun \"feudalism\", now often employed in a political and propagandistic context, was coined by 1771, paralleling the French \"f\u00e9odalit\u00e9\" (\"feudality\").\nAccording to a classic definition by Fran\u00e7ois-Louis Ganshof (1944), \"feudalism\" describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility and revolved around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs, though Ganshof himself noted that his treatment was only related to the \"narrow, technical, legal sense of the word\".\nA broader definition, as described in Marc Bloch's \"Feudal Society\" (1939), includes not only the obligations of the warrior nobility but the obligations of all three estates of the realm: the nobility, the clergy, and those who lived off their labor, most directly the peasantry which was bound by a system of manorialism; this order is often referred to as a \"feudal society\", echoing Bloch's usage.\nOutside its European context, the concept of feudalism is often used by analogy, most often in discussions of feudal Japan under the \"shoguns\", and sometimes in discussions of the Zagwe dynasty in medieval Ethiopia, which had some feudal characteristics (sometimes called \"semifeudal\"). Some have taken the feudalism analogy further, seeing feudalism (or traces of it) in places as diverse as China during the Spring and Autumn period (771-476 BCE), ancient Egypt, the Parthian Empire, the Indian subcontinent and the Antebellum and Jim Crow American South.\nThe term \"feudalism\" has also been applied\u2014often inappropriately or pejoratively\u2014to non-Western societies where institutions and attitudes which are similar to those which existed in medieval Europe are perceived to prevail. Some historians and political theorists believe that the term \"feudalism\" has been deprived of specific meaning by the many ways it has been used, leading them to reject it as a useful concept for understanding society.\nEtymology.\nThe root of the term \"feudal\" originates in the Aryan word \"pe'ku\", meaning \"cattle\", and possessed cognates in many other Indo-European languages: Sanskrit \"pacu\", \"cattle\"; Latin \"pecus\" (cf. \"pecunia\") \"cattle\", \"money\"; Old High German \"fehu, fihu\", \"cattle\", \"property\", \"money\"; Old Frisian \"fia\"; Old Saxon \"fehu\"; Old English \"feoh, fioh, feo, fee\". The term \"f\u00e9odal\" was first used in 17th-century French legal treatises (1614) and translated into English legal treatises as an adjective, such as \"feodal government\".\nIn the 18th century, Adam Smith, seeking to describe economic systems, effectively coined the forms \"feudal government\" and \"feudal system\" in his book \"Wealth of Nations\" (1776). The phrase \"feudal system\" appeared in 1736, in \"Baronia Anglica\", published nine years after the death of its author Thomas Madox, in 1727. In 1771, in his \"History of Manchester\", John Whitaker first introduced the word \"feudalism\" and the notion of the feudal pyramid.\nThe term \"feudal\" or \"feodal\" is derived from the medieval Latin word . The etymology of is complex with multiple theories, some suggesting a Germanic origin (the most widely held view) and others suggesting an Arabic origin. Initially in medieval Latin European documents, a land grant in exchange for service was called a (Latin). Later, the term , or , began to replace in the documents. The first attested instance of this is from 984, although more primitive forms were seen up to one-hundred years earlier. The origin of the and why it replaced has not been well established, but there are multiple theories, described below.\nThe most widely held theory was proposed by Johan Hendrik Caspar Kern in 1870, being supported by, amongst others, William Stubbs and Marc Bloch. Kern derived the word from a putative Frankish term \"*fehu-\u00f4d\", in which \"*fehu\" means \"cattle\" and \"-\u00f4d\" means \"goods\", implying \"a moveable object of value\". Bloch explains that by the beginning of the 10th century it was common to value land in monetary terms but to pay for it with moveable objects of equivalent value, such as arms, clothing, horses or food. This was known as \"feos\", a term that took on the general meaning of paying for something in lieu of money. This meaning was then applied to land itself, in which land was used to pay for fealty, such as to a vassal. Thus the old word \"feos\" meaning movable property changed little by little to \"feus\" meaning the exact opposite: landed property. It has also been suggested that word comes from the Gothic \"faihu\", meaning \"property\", specifically,\"cattle\".\nAnother theory was put forward by Archibald R. Lewis. Lewis said the origin of 'fief' is not \"feudum\" (or \"feodum\"), but rather \"foderum\", the earliest attested use being in Astronomus's \"Vita Hludovici\" (840). In that text is a passage about Louis the Pious that says \"annona militaris quas vulgo foderum vocant\", which can be translated as \"Louis forbade that military provender (which they popularly call \"fodder\") be furnished..\"\nAnother theory by Alauddin Samarrai suggests an Arabic origin, from \"fuy\u016b\" (the plural of \"fay\", which literally means \"the returned\", and was used especially for 'land that has been conquered from enemies that did not fight'). Samarrai's theory is that early forms of 'fief' include \"feo\", \"feu\", \"feuz\", \"feuum\" and others, the plurality of forms strongly suggesting origins from a loanword. The first use of these terms is in Languedoc, one of the least Germanic areas of Europe and bordering Muslim Spain. Further, the earliest use of \"feuum\" (as a replacement for \"beneficium\") can be dated to 899, the same year a Muslim base at Fraxinetum (La Garde-Freinet) in Provence was established. It is possible, Samarrai says, that French scribes, writing in Latin, attempted to transliterate the Arabic word \"fuy\u016b\" (the plural of \"fay\"), which was being used by the Muslim invaders and occupiers at the time, resulting in a plurality of forms \u2013 \"feo, feu, feuz, feuum\" and others \u2013 from which eventually \"feudum\" derived. Samarrai, however, also advises to handle this theory with care, as Medieval and Early Modern Muslim scribes often used etymologically \"fanciful roots\" in order to claim the most outlandish things to be of Arabian or Muslim origin.\nHistory.\nFeudalism, in its various forms, usually emerged as a result of the decentralization of an empire: especially in the Carolingian Empire in 8th century AD, which lacked the bureaucratic infrastructure necessary to support cavalry without allocating land to these mounted troops. Mounted soldiers began to secure a system of hereditary rule over their allocated land and their power over the territory came to encompass the social, political, judicial, and economic spheres.\nThese acquired powers significantly diminished unitary power in these empires. However, once the infrastructure to maintain unitary power was re-established\u2014as with the European monarchies\u2014feudalism began to yield to this new power structure and eventually disappeared.\nClassic feudalism.\nThe classic Fran\u00e7ois-Louis Ganshof version of feudalism describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility, revolving around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs. In broad terms a lord was a noble who held land, a vassal was a person who was granted possession of the land by the lord, and the land was known as a fief. In exchange for the use of the fief and protection by the lord, the vassal would provide some sort of service to the lord. There were many varieties of feudal land tenure, consisting of military and non-military service. The obligations and corresponding rights between lord and vassal concerning the fief form the basis of the feudal relationship.\nVassalage.\nBefore a lord could grant land (a fief) to someone, he had to make that person a vassal. This was done at a formal and symbolic ceremony called a commendation ceremony, which was composed of the two-part act of homage and oath of fealty. During homage, the lord and vassal entered into a contract in which the vassal promised to fight for the lord at his command, whilst the lord agreed to protect the vassal from external forces. \"Fealty\" comes from the Latin \"fidelitas\" and denotes the fidelity owed by a vassal to his feudal lord. \"Fealty\" also refers to an oath that more explicitly reinforces the commitments of the vassal made during homage. Such an oath follows homage.\nOnce the commendation ceremony was complete, the lord and vassal were in a feudal relationship with agreed obligations to one another. The vassal's principal obligation to the lord was to \"aid\", or military service. Using whatever equipment the vassal could obtain by virtue of the revenues from the fief, the vassal was responsible to answer calls to military service on behalf of the lord. This security of military help was the primary reason the lord entered into the feudal relationship. In addition, the vassal could have other obligations to his lord, such as attendance at his court, whether manorial, baronial, both termed court baron, or at the king's court.\nIt could also involve the vassal providing \"counsel\", so that if the lord faced a major decision he would summon all his vassals and hold a council. At the level of the manor this might be a fairly mundane matter of agricultural policy, but also included sentencing by the lord for criminal offences, including capital punishment in some cases. Concerning the king's feudal court, such deliberation could include the question of declaring war. These are examples; depending on the period of time and location in Europe, feudal customs and practices varied; see examples of feudalism.\nThe \"Feudal Revolution\" in France.\nIn its origin, the feudal grant of land had been seen in terms of a personal bond between lord and vassal, but with time and the transformation of fiefs into hereditary holdings, the nature of the system came to be seen as a form of \"politics of land\" (an expression used by the historian Marc Bloch). The 11th century in France saw what has been called by historians a \"feudal revolution\" or \"mutation\" and a \"fragmentation of powers\" (Bloch) that was unlike the development of feudalism in England or Italy or Germany in the same period or later: Counties and duchies began to break down into smaller holdings as castellans and lesser seigneurs took control of local lands, and (as comital families had done before them) lesser lords usurped/privatized a wide range of prerogatives and rights of the state, most importantly the highly profitable rights of justice, but also travel dues, market dues, fees for using woodlands, obligations to use the lord's mill, etc. (what Georges Duby called collectively the \"seigneurie banale\"). Power in this period became more personal.\nThis \"fragmentation of powers\" was not, however, systematic throughout France, and in certain counties (such as Flanders, Normandy, Anjou, Toulouse), counts were able to maintain control of their lands into the 12th century or later. Thus, in some regions (like Normandy and Flanders), the vassal/feudal system was an effective tool for ducal and comital control, linking vassals to their lords; but in other regions, the system led to significant confusion, all the more so as vassals could and frequently did pledge themselves to two or more lords. In response to this, the idea of a \"liege lord\" was developed (where the obligations to one lord are regarded as superior) in the 12th century.\nEnd of European feudalism (1500\u20131850s).\nMost of the military aspects of feudalism effectively ended by about 1500. This was partly since the military shifted from armies consisting of the nobility to professional fighters thus reducing the nobility's claim on power, but also because the Black Death reduced the nobility's hold over the lower classes. Vestiges of the feudal system hung on in France until the French Revolution of the 1790s, and the system lingered on in parts of Central and Eastern Europe as late as the 1850s. Slavery in Romania was abolished in 1856. Russia finally abolished serfdom in 1861.\nEven when the original feudal relationships had disappeared, there were many institutional remnants of feudalism left in place. Historian Georges Lefebvre explains how at an early stage of the French Revolution, on just one night of August 4, 1789, France abolished the long-lasting remnants of the feudal order. It announced, \"The National Assembly abolishes the feudal system entirely.\" Lefebvre explains:\nOriginally the peasants were supposed to pay for the release of seigneurial dues; these dues affected more than a quarter of the farmland in France and provided most of the income of the large landowners. The majority refused to pay and in 1793 the obligation was cancelled. Thus the peasants got their land free, and also no longer paid the tithe to the church.\nFeudal society.\nThe phrase \"feudal society\" as defined by Marc Bloch offers a wider definition than Ganshof's and includes within the feudal structure not only the warrior aristocracy bound by vassalage, but also the peasantry bound by manorialism, and the estates of the Church. Thus the feudal order embraces society from top to bottom, though the \"powerful and well-differentiated social group of the urban classes\" came to occupy a distinct position to some extent outside the classic feudal hierarchy.\nHistoriography.\nThe idea of \"feudalism\" was unknown and the system it describes was not conceived of as a formal political system by the people living in the Medieval Period. This section describes the history of the idea of feudalism, how the concept originated among scholars and thinkers, how it changed over time, and modern debates about its use.\nEvolution of the concept.\nThe concept of a feudal state or period, in the sense of either a regime or a period dominated by lords who possess financial or social power and prestige, became widely held in the middle of the 18th century, as a result of works such as Montesquieu's \"De L'Esprit des Lois\" (1748; published in English as \"The Spirit of the Laws\"), and Henri de Boulainvilliers\u2019s \"Histoire des anciens Parlements de France\" (1737; published in English as \"An Historical Account of the Ancient Parliaments of France or States-General of the Kingdom\", 1739). In the 18th century, writers of the Enlightenment wrote about feudalism to denigrate the antiquated system of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\", or French monarchy. This was the Age of Enlightenment when writers valued reason and the Middle Ages were viewed as the \"Dark Ages\". Enlightenment authors generally mocked and ridiculed anything from the \"Dark Ages\" including feudalism, projecting its negative characteristics on the current French monarchy as a means of political gain. For them \"feudalism\" meant seigneurial privileges and prerogatives. When the French Constituent Assembly abolished the \"feudal regime\" in August 1789 this is what was meant.\nAdam Smith used the term \"feudal system\" to describe a social and economic system defined by inherited social ranks, each of which possessed inherent social and economic privileges and obligations. In such a system wealth derived from agriculture, which was arranged not according to market forces but on the basis of customary labour services owed by serfs to landowning nobles.\nKarl Marx.\nKarl Marx also used the term in the 19th century in his analysis of society's economic and political development, describing feudalism (or more usually feudal society or the feudal mode of production) as the order coming before capitalism. For Marx, what defined feudalism was the power of the ruling class (the aristocracy) in their control of arable land, leading to a class society based upon the exploitation of the peasants who farm these lands, typically under serfdom and principally by means of labour, produce and money rents. Marx thus defined feudalism primarily by its economic characteristics.\nHe also took it as a paradigm for understanding the power-relationships between capitalists and wage-labourers in his own time: \"in pre-capitalist systems it was obvious that most people did not control their own destiny\u2014under feudalism, for instance, serfs had to work for their lords. Capitalism seems different because people are in theory free to work for themselves or for others as they choose. Yet most workers have as little control over their lives as feudal serfs.\" Some later Marxist theorists (e.g. Eric Wolf) have applied this label to include non-European societies, grouping feudalism together with Imperial Chinese and pre-Columbian Incan societies as 'tributary'.\nLater studies.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, John Horace Round and Frederic William Maitland, both historians of medieval Britain, arrived at different conclusions as to the character of English society before the Norman Conquest in 1066. Round argued that the Normans had brought feudalism with them to England, while Maitland contended that its fundamentals were already in place in Britain before 1066. The debate continues today, but a consensus viewpoint is that England before the Conquest had commendation (which embodied some of the personal elements in feudalism) while William the Conqueror introduced a modified and stricter northern French feudalism to England incorporating (1086) oaths of loyalty to the king by all who held by feudal tenure, even the vassals of his principal vassals (holding by feudal tenure meant that vassals must provide the quota of knights required by the king or a money payment in substitution).\nIn the 20th century, two outstanding historians offered still more widely differing perspectives. The French historian Marc Bloch, arguably the most influential 20th-century medieval historian, approached feudalism not so much from a legal and military point of view but from a sociological one, presenting in \"Feudal Society\" (1939; English 1961) a feudal order not limited solely to the nobility. It is his radical notion that peasants were part of the feudal relationship that sets Bloch apart from his peers: while the vassal performed military service in exchange for the fief, the peasant performed physical labour in return for protection \u2013 both are a form of feudal relationship. According to Bloch, other elements of society can be seen in feudal terms; all the aspects of life were centered on \"lordship\", and so we can speak usefully of a feudal church structure, a feudal courtly (and anti-courtly) literature, and a feudal economy.\nIn contradistinction to Bloch, the Belgian historian Fran\u00e7ois-Louis Ganshof defined feudalism from a narrow legal and military perspective, arguing that feudal relationships existed only within the medieval nobility itself. Ganshof articulated this concept in \"Qu'est-ce que la f\u00e9odalit\u00e9?\" (\"What is feudalism?\", 1944; translated in English as \"Feudalism\"). His classic definition of feudalism is widely accepted today among medieval scholars, though questioned both by those who view the concept in wider terms and by those who find insufficient uniformity in noble exchanges to support such a model.\nAlthough he was never formally a student in the circle of scholars around Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre that came to be known as the Annales School, Georges Duby was an exponent of the \"Annaliste\" tradition. In a published version of his 1952 doctoral thesis entitled \"La soci\u00e9t\u00e9 aux XIe et XIIe si\u00e8cles dans la r\u00e9gion m\u00e2connaise\" (\"Society in the 11th and 12th centuries in the M\u00e2connais region\"), and working from the extensive documentary sources surviving from the Burgundian monastery of Cluny, as well as the dioceses of M\u00e2con and Dijon, Duby excavated the complex social and economic relationships among the individuals and institutions of the M\u00e2connais region and charted a profound shift in the social structures of medieval society around the year 1000. He argued that in early 11th century, governing institutions\u2014particularly comital courts established under the Carolingian monarchy\u2014that had represented public justice and order in Burgundy during the 9th and 10th centuries receded and gave way to a new feudal order wherein independent aristocratic knights wielded power over peasant communities through strong-arm tactics and threats of violence.\nIn 1939 the Austrian historian subordinated the feudal state as secondary to his concept of a \"Personenverbandsstaat\" (personal interdependency state), understanding it in contrast to the territorial state. This form of statehood, identified with the Holy Roman Empire, is described as the most complete form of medieval rule, completing conventional feudal structure of lordship and vassalage with the personal association between the nobility.\u00a0 But the applicability of this concept to cases outside of the Holy Roman Empire has been questioned, as by Susan Reynolds. The concept has also been questioned and superseded in German histography because of its bias and reductionism towards legitimating the F\u00fchrerprinzip.\nChallenges to the feudal model.\nIn 1974, the American historian Elizabeth A. R. Brown rejected the label \"feudalism\" as an anachronism that imparts a false sense of uniformity to the concept. Having noted the current use of many, often contradictory, definitions of \"feudalism\", she argued that the word is only a construct with no basis in medieval reality, an invention of modern historians read back \"tyrannically\" into the historical record. Supporters of Brown have suggested that the term should be expunged from history textbooks and lectures on medieval history entirely. In \"Fiefs and Vassals: The Medieval Evidence Reinterpreted\" (1994), Susan Reynolds expanded upon Brown's original thesis. Although some contemporaries questioned Reynolds's methodology, other historians have supported it and her argument. Reynolds argues:\nToo many models of feudalism used for comparisons, even by Marxists, are still either constructed on the 16th-century basis or incorporate what, in a Marxist view, must surely be superficial or irrelevant features from it. Even when one restricts oneself to Europe and to feudalism in its narrow sense it is extremely doubtful whether feudo-vassalic institutions formed a coherent bundle of institutions or concepts that were structurally separate from other institutions and concepts of the time.\nThe term \"feudal\" has also been applied to non-Western societies in which institutions and attitudes similar to those of medieval Europe are perceived to have prevailed (See Examples of feudalism). Japan has been extensively studied in this regard. Friday notes that in the 21st century historians of Japan rarely invoke feudalism; instead of looking at similarities, specialists attempting comparative analysis concentrate on fundamental differences. Ultimately, critics say, the many ways the term \"feudalism\" has been used have deprived it of specific meaning, leading some historians and political theorists to reject it as a useful concept for understanding society.\nRichard Abels notes that \"Western Civilization and World Civilization textbooks now shy away from the term 'feudalism'.\"\nSee also.\nMilitary:\nNon-European:"}
{"id": "11299", "revid": "13816079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11299", "title": "Fox", "text": "Foxes are small to medium-sized, omnivorous mammals belonging to several genera of the family Canidae. Foxes have a flattened skull, upright triangular ears, a pointed, slightly upturned snout, and a long bushy tail (or \"brush\").\nTwelve species belong to the monophyletic \"true foxes\" group of genus \"Vulpes\". Approximately another 25 current or extinct species are always or sometimes called foxes; these foxes are either part of the paraphyletic group of the South American foxes, or of the outlying group, which consists of the bat-eared fox, gray fox, and island fox. Foxes live on every continent except Antarctica. By far the most common and widespread species of fox is the red fox (\"Vulpes vulpes\") with about 47 recognized subspecies. The global distribution of foxes, together with their widespread reputation for cunning, has contributed to their prominence in popular culture and folklore in many societies around the world. The hunting of foxes with packs of hounds, long an established pursuit in Europe, especially in the British Isles, was exported by European settlers to various parts of the New World.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"fox\" comes from Old English, which derived from Proto-Germanic *\"fuhsaz\". This in turn derives from Proto-Indo-European *\"pu\u1e31-\", meaning \u2019thick-haired; tail\u2019. Male foxes are known as dogs, tods or reynards, females as vixens, and young as cubs, pups, or kits, though the latter name is not to be confused with a distinct species called kit foxes. Vixen is one of very few words in modern English that retains the Middle English southern dialect \"v\" pronunciation instead of \"f\" (i.e. northern English \"fox\" versus southern English \"vox\"). A group of foxes is referred to as a skulk, leash, or earth.\nPhylogenetic relationships.\nWithin the Canidae, the results of DNA analysis shows several phylogenetic divisions:\nBiology.\nGeneral morphology.\nFoxes are generally smaller than some other members of the family Canidae such as wolves and jackals, while they may be larger than some within the family, such as Raccoon dogs. In the largest species, the red fox, males weigh on average between , while the smallest species, the fennec fox, weighs just . Foxy features typically include a triangular face, pointed ears, an elongated rostrum, and a bushy tail. Foxes are digitigrade; they walk on their toes. Unlike most members of the family Canidae, foxes have partially retractable claws. Fox vibrissae, or whiskers, are black. The whiskers on the muzzle, known as mystacial vibrissae, average long, while the whiskers everywhere else on the head average to be shorter in length. Whiskers (carpal vibrissae) are also on the forelimbs and average long, pointing downward and backward. Other physical characteristics vary according to habitat and adaptive significance.\nPelage.\nFox species differ in fur color, length, and density. Coat colors range from pearly white to black-and-white to black flecked with white or grey on the underside. Fennec foxes (and other species of fox adapted to life in the desert, such as kit foxes), for example, have large ears and short fur to aid in keeping the body cool. Arctic foxes, on the other hand, have tiny ears and short limbs as well as thick, insulating fur, which aid in keeping the body warm. Red foxes, by contrast, have a typical auburn pelt, the tail normally ending with a white marking. A fox's coat color and texture may vary due to the change in seasons; fox pelts are richer and denser in the colder months and lighter in the warmer months. To get rid of the dense winter coat, foxes moult once a year around April; the process begins from the feet, up the legs, and then along the back. Coat color may also change as the individual ages.\nDentition.\nA fox's dentition, like all other canids, is I 3/3, C 1/1, PM 4/4, M 3/2 = 42. (Bat-eared foxes have six extra molars, totalling in 48 teeth.) Foxes have pronounced carnassial pairs, which is characteristic of a carnivore. These pairs consist of the upper premolar and the lower first molar, and work together to shear tough material like flesh. Foxes' canines are pronounced, also characteristic of a carnivore, and are excellent in gripping prey.\nBehaviour.\nIn the wild, the typical lifespan of a fox is one to three years, although individuals may live up to ten years. Unlike many canids, foxes are not always pack animals. Typically, they live in small family groups, but some (such as Arctic foxes) are known to be solitary.\nFoxes are omnivores. Their diet is made up primarily of invertebrates such as insects and small vertebrates such as reptiles and birds. They may also eat eggs and vegetation. Many species are generalist predators, but some (such as the crab-eating fox) have more specialized diets. Most species of fox consume around of food every day. Foxes cache excess food, burying it for later consumption, usually under leaves, snow, or soil. While hunting, foxes tend to use a particular pouncing technique, such that they crouch down to camouflage themselves in the terrain and then use their hind legs to leap up with great force and land on top of their chosen prey. Using their pronounced canine teeth, they can then grip the prey's neck and shake it until it is dead or can be readily disemboweled.\nThe gray fox is one of only two canine species known to regularly climb trees; the other is the raccoon dog.\nSexual characteristics.\nThe male fox's scrotum is held up close to the body with the testes inside even after they descend. Like other canines, the male fox has a baculum, or penile bone. The testes of red foxes are smaller than those of Arctic foxes. Sperm formation in red foxes begins in August\u2013September, with the testicles attaining their greatest weight in December\u2013February.\nVixens are in heat for one to six days, making their reproductive cycle twelve months long. As with other canines, the ova are shed during estrus without the need for the stimulation of copulating. Once the egg is fertilized, the vixen enters a period of gestation that can last from 52 to 53 days. Foxes tend to have an average litter size of four to five with an 80 percent success rate in becoming pregnant. Litter sizes can vary greatly according to species and environmentthe Arctic fox, for example, can have up to eleven kits.\nThe vixen usually has six or eight mammae. Each teat has 8 to 20 lactiferous ducts, which connect the mammary gland to the nipple, allowing for milk to be carried to the nipple.\nVocalization.\nThe fox's vocal repertoire is vast:\nIn the case of domesticated foxes, the whining seems to remain in adult individuals as a sign of excitement and submission in the presence of their owners.\nClassification.\nCanids commonly known as foxes include the following genera and species:\nConservation.\nSeveral fox species are endangered in their native environments. Pressures placed on foxes include habitat loss and being hunted for pelts, other trade, or control. Due in part to their opportunistic hunting style and industriousness, foxes are commonly resented as nuisance animals. On the other hand, foxes, while often considered pests themselves, have been successfully employed to control pests on fruit farms while leaving the fruit intact.\nIsland fox (\"Urocyon littoralis\").\nThe island fox, though considered a near-threatened species throughout the world, is becoming increasingly endangered in its endemic environment of the California Channel Islands. A population on an island is smaller than those on the mainland because of limited resources like space, food and shelter. Island populations, therefore, are highly susceptible to external threats ranging from introduced predatory species and humans to extreme weather. On the California Channel Islands, it was found that the population of the island fox was so low due to an outbreak of canine distemper virus from 1999 to 2000 as well as predation by non-native golden eagles. Since 1993, the eagles have caused the population to decline by as much as 95%. Because of the low number of foxes, the population went through an Allee effect; this is where at low enough densities, an individual's fitness decreases. Conservationists, therefore, had to take healthy breeding pairs out of the wild population to breed them in captivity until they had enough foxes to release back into the wild. Nonnative grazers were also removed so that native plants would be able to grow back to their natural height, thereby providing adequate cover and protection for the foxes against golden eagles.\nDarwin's fox (\"Pseudalopex fulvipes\").\nDarwin's fox is considered critically endangered because of their small known population of 250 mature individuals as well as their restricted distribution. On the Chilean mainland, the population is limited to Nahuelbuta National Park and the surrounding Valdivian rainforest. Similarly on Chilo\u00e9 Island, their population is limited to the forests that extend from the southernmost to the northwesternmost part of the island. Though the Nahuelbuta National Park is protected, 90% of the species live on Chilo\u00e9 Island. A major problem the species faces, therefore, is their dwindling, limited habitat due to the cutting and burning of the unprotected forests. Because of deforestation, the Darwin's fox habitat is shrinking, allowing for their competitor's (chilla fox) preferred habitat of open space, to increase; the Darwin's fox, subsequently, is being outcompeted. Another problem they face is their inability to fight off diseases transmitted by the increasing number of pet dogs. To conserve these animals, researchers suggest the need for the forests that link the Nahuelbuta National Park to the coast of Chile and in turn Chilo\u00e9 Island and its forests, to be protected. They also suggest that other forests around Chile be examined to determine whether Darwin's foxes have previously existed there or can live there in the future, should the need to reintroduce the species to those areas arise. And finally, the researchers advise for the creation of a captive breeding program, in Chile, because of the limited number of mature individuals in the wild.\nRelationships with humans.\nFoxes are often considered pests or nuisance creatures for their opportunistic attacks on poultry and other small livestock. Fox attacks on humans are not common.\nMany foxes adapt well to human environments, with several species classified as \"resident urban carnivores\" for their ability to sustain populations entirely within urban boundaries. Foxes in urban areas can live longer and can have smaller litter sizes than foxes in non-urban areas. Urban foxes are ubiquitous in Europe, where they show altered behaviors compared to non-urban foxes, including increased population density, smaller territory, and pack foraging. Foxes have been introduced in numerous locations, with varying effects on indigenous flora and fauna.\nIn some countries, foxes are major predators of rabbits and hens. Population oscillations of these two species were the first nonlinear oscillation studied, and led to the derivation of the Lotka\u2013Volterra equation.\nFox hunting.\nFox hunting originated in the United Kingdom in the 16th century. Hunting with dogs is now banned in the United Kingdom, though hunting without dogs is still permitted. Red foxes were introduced into Australia in the early 19th century for sport, and have since become widespread through much of the country. They have caused population decline among many native species and prey on livestock, especially new lambs. Fox hunting is practiced as recreation in several other countries including Canada, France, Ireland, Italy, Russia, United States and Australia.\nDomestication.\nThere are many records of domesticated red foxes and others, but rarely of sustained domestication. A recent and notable exception is the Russian silver fox, which resulted in visible and behavioral changes, and is a case study of an animal population modeling according to human domestication needs. The current group of domesticated silver foxes are the result of nearly fifty years of experiments in the Soviet Union and Russia to domesticate the silver morph of the red fox. This selective breeding resulted in physical and behavioral traits appearing that are frequently seen in domestic cats, dogs, and other animals, such as pigmentation changes, floppy ears, and curly tails. Notably, the new foxes became more tame, allowing themselves to be petted, whimpering to get attention and sniffing and licking their caretakers.\nAttacks on humans.\nIn the United Kingdom, a number of cases of non-fatal attacks on humans have been reported. They often involved children, or if there were gaps in homes through which foxes could pass.\nUrban foxes.\nFoxes are among the comparatively few mammals which have been able to adapt themselves to a certain degree to living in urban (mostly suburban) human environments. Their omnivorous diet allows them to survive on discarded food waste, and their skittish and often nocturnal nature means that they are often able to avoid detection, despite their larger size. Urban foxes, however, have been identified as threats to cats and small dogs, and for this reason there is often pressure to exclude them from these environments.\nThe San Joaquin kit fox is a highly endangered species that has, ironically, become adapted to urban living in the San Joaquin Valley and Salinas Valley of southern California. Its diet includes mice, ground squirrels, rabbits, hares, bird eggs, and insects, and it has claimed habitats in open areas, golf courses, drainage basins, and school grounds.\nIn culture.\nThe fox appears in many cultures, usually in folklore. However, there are slight variations in their depictions. In Western and Persian folklore, foxes are symbols of cunning and trickery\u2014a reputation derived especially from their reputed ability to evade hunters. This is usually represented as a character possessing these traits. These traits are used on a wide variety of characters, either making them a nuisance to the story, a misunderstood hero, or a devious villain.\nIn Asian folklore, foxes are depicted as familiar spirits possessing magic powers. Similar to in Western folklore, foxes are portrayed as mischievous, usually tricking other people, with the ability to disguise as an attractive female human. However, there are other depictions of foxes as mystical, sacred creatures that can either bring wonder or ruin. Nine-tailed foxes appear in Chinese folklore, literature, and mythology, in which, depending on the tale, they can be a good or a bad omen. The motif was eventually introduced from Chinese to Japanese and Korean cultures.\nThe constellation Vulpecula represents a fox."}
{"id": "11300", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11300", "title": "Foundationalism", "text": "Foundationalism concerns philosophical theories of knowledge resting upon justified belief, or some secure foundation of certainty such as a conclusion inferred from a basis of sound premises. The main rival of the foundationalist theory of justification is the coherence theory of justification, whereby a body of knowledge, not requiring a secure foundation, can be established by the interlocking strength of its components, like a puzzle solved without prior certainty that each small region was solved correctly.\nIdentifying the alternatives as either circular reasoning or infinite regress, and thus exhibiting the regress problem, Aristotle made foundationalism his own clear choice, positing basic beliefs underpinning others. Descartes, the most famed foundationalist, discovered a foundation in the fact of his own existence and in the \"clear and distinct\" ideas of reason, whereas Locke found a foundation in experience. Differing foundations may reflect differing epistemological emphases\u2014empiricists emphasizing \"experience\", rationalists emphasizing \"reason\"\u2014but may blend both.\nIn the 1930s, debate over foundationalism revived. Whereas Moritz Schlick viewed scientific knowledge like a pyramid where a special class of statements does not require verification through other beliefs and serves as a foundation, Otto Neurath argued that scientific knowledge lacks an ultimate foundation and acts like a raft. In the 1950s, foundationalism fell into decline \u2013 largely due to the influence of Willard Van Orman Quine, whose ontological relativity found any belief networked to one's beliefs on all of reality, while auxiliary beliefs somewhere in the vast network are readily modified to protect desired beliefs.\nClassically, foundationalism had posited infallibility of basic beliefs and deductive reasoning between beliefs\u2014a strong foundationalism. Around 1975, weak foundationalism emerged. Thus recent foundationalists have variously allowed fallible basic beliefs, and inductive reasoning between them, either by enumerative induction or by inference to the best explanation. And whereas internalists require cognitive access to justificatory means, externalists find justification without such access.\nHistory.\nFoundationalism was initiated by French early modern philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes. In his \"Meditations\", Descartes challenged the contemporary principles of philosophy by arguing that everything he knew he learnt from or through his senses. He used various arguments to challenge the reliability of the senses, citing previous errors and the possibilities that he was dreaming or being deceived by an Evil Demon. Descartes attempted to establish the secure foundations for knowledge to avoid scepticism. He contrasted the information provided by senses, which is unclear and uncertain, with the truths of geometry, which are clear and distinct. Geometrical truths are also certain and indubitable; Descartes thus attempted to find truths which were clear and distinct because they would be indubitably true and a suitable foundation for knowledge. His method was to question all of his beliefs until he reached something clear and distinct that was indubitably true. The result was his \"cogito ergo sum\" \u2013 'I think therefore I am', or the belief that he was thinking \u2013 as his indubitable belief suitable as a foundation for knowledge. This resolved Descartes' problem of the Evil Demon \u2013 the possibility that he was being deceived by an Evil Demon, rendering all of his beliefs about the external world false. Even if his beliefs about the external world were false, his beliefs about what he was experiencing were still indubitably true, even if those perceptions do not relate to anything in the world.\nSeveral other philosophers of the early modern period, including John Locke, G. W. Leibniz, George Berkeley, David Hume, and Thomas Reid, all accepted foundationalism as well. Baruch Spinoza was interpreted as metaphysical foundationalist by G. W. F. Hegel, a proponent of coherentism. Immanuel Kant's foundationalism rests on his theory of categories.\nIn late modern philosophy, foundationalism was defended by J. G. Fichte in his book \"Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre\" (1794/1795), Wilhelm Windelband in his book \"\u00dcber die Gewi\u00dfheit der Erkenntniss.\" (1873), and Gottlob Frege in his book \"Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik\" (1884).\nIn contemporary philosophy, foundationalism has been defended by Edmund Husserl, Bertrand Russell and John McDowell.\nDefinition.\nFoundationalism is an attempt to respond to the regress problem of justification in epistemology. According to this argument, every proposition requires justification to support it, but any justification also needs to be justified itself. If this goes on \"ad infinitum\", it is not clear how anything in the chain could be justified. Foundationalism holds that there are 'basic beliefs' which serve as foundations to anchor the rest of our beliefs. Strong versions of the theory assert that an indirectly justified belief is completely justified by basic beliefs; more moderate theories hold that indirectly justified beliefs require basic beliefs to be justified, but can be further justified by other factors.\nDuring thousands of years, Western philosophy pursued a solid foundation as the ultimate and eternal reference system of knowledge called foundationalism. It has existed since ancient Greece, the focus of this theory is that all knowledge or cognitive awareness of the subject (human being) are based on a solid foundation. This foundation serves not only as the starting point merely as a basis for knowledge of the truth of existence. Thinking is the process of proving the validity of knowledge, not proving the rationality of the foundation from which knowledge is shaped. This means, with ultimate cause, the foundation is true, absolute, entire and impossible to prove. Neopragmatist philosopher Richard Rorty, a proponent of anti-foundationalism, said that the fundamentalism confirmed the existence of the \"privileged representation\" which constitutes the foundation, from which dominates epistemology. Plato's theory of Forms is the earliest foundationalism. So from the point of view of Plato, the Forms shows the general concept which plays as a model for the release of existence, which is only the faint copy of the Forms of eternity, that means, understanding the expression of objects leads to acquiring all knowledge, then acquiring knowledge accompanies achieving the truth. Achieving the truth means understanding the foundation. This idea still has some appeal in for example international relations studies.\nClassical foundationalism.\nFoundationalism holds basic beliefs exist, which are justified without reference to other beliefs, and that nonbasic beliefs must ultimately be justified by basic beliefs. Classical foundationalism maintains that basic beliefs must be infallible if they are to justify nonbasic beliefs, and that only deductive reasoning can be used to transfer justification from one belief to another. Laurence BonJour has argued that the classical formulation of foundationalism requires basic beliefs to be infallible, incorrigible, indubitable, and certain if they are to be adequately justified. Mental states and immediate experience are often taken as good candidates for basic beliefs because it is argued that beliefs about these do not need further support to be justified.\nModest foundationalism.\nAs an alternative to the classic view, modest foundationalism does not require that basic perceptual beliefs are infallible, but holds that it is reasonable to assume that perceptual beliefs are justified unless evidence to the contrary exists. This is still foundationalism because it maintains that all non-basic beliefs must be ultimately justified by basic beliefs, but it does not require that basic beliefs are infallible and allows inductive reasoning as an acceptable form of inference. For example, a belief that 'I see red' could be defeated with psychological evidence showing my mind to be confused or inattentive. Modest foundationalism can also be used to avoid the problem of inference. Even if perceptual beliefs are infallible, it is not clear that they can infallibly ground empirical knowledge (even if my belief that the table looks red to me is infallible, the inference to the belief that the table actually is red might not be infallible). Modest foundationalism does not require this link between perception and reality to be so strong; our perception of a table being yellow is adequate justification to believe that this is the case, even if it is not infallible.\nReformed epistemology is a form of modest foundationalism which takes religious beliefs as basic because they are non-inferentially justified: their justification arises from religious experience, rather than prior beliefs. This takes a modest approach to foundationalism \u2013 religious beliefs are not taken to be infallible, but are assumed to be \"prima facie\" justified unless evidence arises to the contrary.\nInternalism and externalism.\nFoundationalism can take internalist and externalist forms. Internalism requires that a believer's justification for a belief must be accessible to them for it to be justified. Foundationalist internalists have held that basic beliefs are justified by mental events or states, such as experiences, that do not constitute beliefs. Alternatively, basic beliefs may be justified by some special property of the belief itself, such as its being self-evident or infallible. Externalism maintains that it is unnecessary for the means of justification of a belief to be accessible to the believer.\nReliabilism is an externalist foundationalist theory, initially proposed by Alvin Goldman, which argues that a belief is justified if it is reliably produced, meaning that it will be probably true. Goldman distinguished between two kinds of justification for beliefs: belief-dependent and belief-independent. A belief-dependent process uses prior beliefs to produce new beliefs; a belief-independent process does not, using other stimuli instead. Beliefs produced this way are justified because the processes that cause them are reliable; this might be because we have evolved to reach good conclusions when presented with sense-data, meaning the conclusions we draw from our senses are usually true.\nCriticisms.\nCritics of foundationalism often argue that for a belief to be justified it must be supported by other beliefs; in Donald Davidson's phrase, \"only a belief can be a reason for another belief\". For instance, Wilfrid Sellars argued that non-doxastic mental states cannot be reasons, and so noninferential warrant cannot be derived from them. Similarly, critics of externalist foundationalism argue that only mental states or properties the believer is aware of could make a belief justified.\nAccording to skepticism, there are no beliefs that are so obviously certain that they require support from no other beliefs. Even if one does not accept this very strong claim, foundationalists have a problem with giving an uncontroversial or principled account of which beliefs are self-evident or indubitable.\nPostmodernists and post-structuralists such as Richard Rorty and Jacques Derrida have attacked foundationalism on the grounds that the truth of a statement or discourse is only verifiable in accordance with other statements and discourses. Rorty in particular elaborates further on this, claiming that the individual, the community, the human body as a whole have a 'means by which they know the world' (this entails language, culture, semiotic systems, mathematics, science etc.). In order to verify particular means, or particular statements belonging to certain means (e.g., the propositions of the natural sciences), a person would have to 'step outside' the means and critique them neutrally, in order to provide a foundation for adopting them. However, this is impossible. The only way in which one can know the world is through the means by which they know the world; a method cannot justify itself. This argument can be seen as directly related to Wittgenstein's theory of language, drawing a parallel between postmodernism and late logical positivism that is united in critique of foundationalism."}
{"id": "11302", "revid": "1012511425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11302", "title": "Felidae", "text": "Felidae () is a family of mammals in the order Carnivora, colloquially referred to as cats, and constitutes a clade. A member of this family is also called a felid (). The term \"cat\" refers both to felids in general and specifically to the domestic cat (\"Felis catus\").\nFelidae species exhibit the most diverse fur pattern of all terrestrial carnivores. Cats have retractile claws, slender muscular bodies and strong flexible forelimbs. Their teeth and facial muscles allow for a powerful bite. They are all obligate carnivores, and most are solitary predators ambushing or stalking their prey. Wild cats occur in Africa, Europe, Asia and the Americas. Some wild cat species are adapted to forest habitats, some to arid environments, and a few also to wetlands and mountainous terrain. Their activity patterns range from nocturnal and crepuscular to diurnal, depending on their preferred prey species.\nReginald Innes Pocock divided the extant Felidae into three subfamilies: the Pantherinae, the Felinae and the Acinonychinae, differing from each other by the ossification of the hyoid apparatus and by the cutaneous sheaths which protect their claws.\nThis concept has been revised following developments in molecular biology and techniques for analysis of morphological data. Today, the living Felidae are divided in two subfamilies: the Pantherinae and Felinae, with the Acinonychinae subsumed into the latter. Pantherinae includes five \"Panthera\" and two \"Neofelis\" species, while Felinae includes the other 34 species in ten genera.\nThe first cats emerged during the Oligocene about , with the appearance of \"Proailurus\" and \"Pseudaelurus\". The latter species complex was ancestral to two main lines of felids: the cats in the extant subfamilies and a group of extinct cats of the subfamily Machairodontinae, which include the saber-toothed cats such as the \"Smilodon\". The \"false sabre-toothed cats\", the Barbourofelidae and Nimravidae, are not true cats, but are closely related. Together with the Felidae, Viverridae, hyaenas and mongooses, they constitute the Feliformia.\nCharacteristics.\nAll members of the cat family have the following characteristics in common:\nThe colour, length and density of their fur is very diverse. Fur colour covers the gamut from white to black, and fur pattern from distinctive small spots, stripes to small blotches and rosettes. Most cat species are born with a spotted fur, except the jaguarundi (\"Herpailurus yagouaroundi\"), Asian golden cat (\"Catopuma temminckii\") and caracal (\"Caracal caracal\"). The spotted fur of lion (\"Panthera leo\") and cougar (\"Puma concolor\") cubs change to a uniform fur during their ontogeny. Those living in cold environments have thick fur with long hair, like the snow leopard (\"Panthera uncia\") and the Pallas's cat (\"Otocolobus manul\"). Those living in tropical and hot climate zones have short fur. Several species exhibit melanism with all-black individuals.\nIn the great majority of cat species, the tail is between a third and a half of the body length, although with some exceptions, like the \"Lynx\" species and margay. Cat species vary greatly in body and skull sizes, and weights:\nMost cat species have a haploid number of 18 or 19. Central and South American cats have a haploid number of 18, possibly due to the combination of two smaller chromosomes into a larger one.\nMost cat species are also induced ovulators, although margays appear to be spontaneous ovulators.\nEvolution.\nThe family Felidae is part of the Feliformia, a suborder that diverged probably about into several families. The Felidae and the Asiatic linsangs are considered a sister group, which split about .\nThe earliest cats probably appeared about . \"Proailurus\" is the oldest known cat that occurred after the Eocene\u2013Oligocene extinction event about ; fossil remains were excavated in France and Mongolia's Hsanda Gol Formation. Fossil occurrences indicate that the Felidae arrived in North America earliest . This is about later than the Ursidae and the Nimravidae, and about 10\u00a0million years later than the Canidae.\nIn the Early Miocene about , \"Pseudaelurus\" lived in Africa. Its fossil jaws were also excavated in geological formations of Europe's Vallesian, Asia's Middle Miocene and North America's late Hemingfordian to late Barstovian epochs.\nIn the Early or Middle Miocene, the sabre-toothed Machairodontinae evolved in Africa and migrated northwards in the Late Miocene. With their large upper canines, they were adapted to prey on large-bodied megaherbivores. \"Miomachairodus\" is the oldest known member of this subfamily. \"Metailurus\" lived in Africa and Eurasia about . Several \"Paramachaerodus\" skeletons were found in Spain. \"Homotherium\" appeared in Africa, Eurasia and North America around , and \"Megantereon\" about . \"Smilodon\" lived in North and South America from about . This subfamily became extinct in the Late Pleistocene.\nResults of mitochondrial analysis indicate that the living Felidae species descended from a common ancestor, which originated in Asia in the Late Miocene epoch. They migrated to Africa, Europe and the Americas in the course of at least 10 migration waves during the past ~11\u00a0million years. Low sea levels, interglacial and glacial periods facilitated these migrations. \"Panthera blytheae\" is the oldest known pantherine cat dated to the late Messinian to early Zanclean ages about . A fossil skull was excavated in 2010 in Zanda County on the Tibetan Plateau. \"Panthera palaeosinensis\" from North China probably dates to the Late Miocene or Early Pliocene. The skull of the holotype is similar to that of a lion or leopard. \"Panthera zdanskyi\" dates to the Gelasian about . Several fossil skulls and jawbones were excavated in northwestern China. \"Panthera gombaszoegensis\" is the earliest known pantherine cat that lived in Europe about .\nLiving felids fall into eight evolutionary lineages or species clades. Genotyping of nuclear DNA of all 41 felid species revealed that hybridization between species occurred in the course of evolution within the majority of the eight lineages.\nModelling of felid coat pattern transformations revealed that nearly all patterns evolved from small spots.\nClassification.\nTraditionally, five subfamilies have been distinguished within the Felidae based on phenotypical features: the Pantherinae, the Felinae, the Acinonychinae, and the extinct Machairodontinae and Proailurinae.\nPhylogeny.\nThe following cladogram based on Piras et al. (2013) depicts the phylogeny of basal living and extinct groups.\nThe phylogenetic relationships of living felids are shown in the following cladogram:"}
{"id": "11303", "revid": "28481827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11303", "title": "Folklore", "text": "Folklore is the expressive body of culture shared by a particular group of people; it encompasses the traditions common to that culture, subculture or group. These include oral traditions such as tales, proverbs and jokes. They include material culture, ranging from traditional building styles to handmade toys common to the group. Folklore also includes customary lore, the forms and rituals of celebrations such as Christmas and weddings, folk dances and initiation rites. Each one of these, either singly or in combination, is considered a folklore artifact. Just as essential as the form, folklore also encompasses the transmission of these artifacts from one region to another or from one generation to the next. Folklore is not something one can typically gain in a formal school curriculum or study in the fine arts. Instead, these traditions are passed along informally from one individual to another either through verbal instruction or demonstration. The academic study of folklore is called folklore studies or folkloristics, and it can be explored at undergraduate, graduate and Ph.D. levels.\nOverview.\nThe word \"folklore\", a compound of \"folk\" and \"lore\", was coined in 1846 by the Englishman William Thoms, who contrived the term as a replacement for the contemporary terminology of \"popular antiquities\" or \"popular literature\". The second half of the word, \"lore\", comes from Old English l\u0101r 'instruction'. It is the knowledge and traditions of a particular group, frequently passed along by word of mouth.\nThe concept of \"folk\" has varied over time. When Thoms first created this term, \"folk\" applied only to rural, frequently poor and illiterate peasants. A more modern definition of \"folk\" is a social group that includes two or more persons with common traits, who express their shared identity through distinctive traditions. \"Folk is a flexible concept which can refer to a nation as in American folklore or to a single family.\" This expanded social definition of \"folk\" supports a broader view of the material, i.e. the lore, considered to be \"folklore artifacts\". These now include all \"things people make with words (verbal lore), things they make with their hands (material lore), and things they make with their actions (customary lore)\". Folklore is no longer considered to be limited to that which is old or obsolete. The folklorist studies the traditional artifacts of a social group and how they are transmitted. \"Transmission\" is a vital part of the folklore process; without communicating these beliefs and customs within the group over space and time, they would be relegated to cultural archaeologists. These folk artifacts continue to be passed along informally, as a rule anonymously, and always in multiple variants. The folk group is not individualistic, it is community-based and nurtures its lore in community. \"As new groups emerge, new folklore is created\u2026 surfers, motorcyclists, \". In direct contrast to high culture, where any single work of a named artist is protected by copyright law, folklore is a function of shared identity within a common social group.\nHaving identified folk artifacts, the professional folklorist strives to understand the \"significance\" of these beliefs, customs, and objects for the group, since these cultural units would not be passed along unless they had some continued relevance within the group. That meaning can however shift and morph, for example: the Halloween celebration of the 21st century is not the All Hallows' Eve of the Middle Ages, and even gives rise to its own set of urban legends independent of the historical celebration; the cleansing rituals of Orthodox Judaism were originally good public health in a land with little water, but now these customs signify for some people identification as an Orthodox Jew. By comparison, a common action such as tooth brushing, which is also transmitted within a group, remains a practical hygiene and health issue and does not rise to the level of a group-defining tradition. Tradition is initially remembered behavior; once it loses its practical purpose, there is no reason for further transmission unless it has been imbued with meaning beyond the initial practicality of the action. This meaning is at the core of folkloristics, the study of folklore.\nWith an increasingly theoretical sophistication of the social sciences, it has become evident that folklore is a naturally occurring and necessary component of any social group; it is indeed all around us. Folklore does not have to be old or antiquated, it continues to be created and transmitted, and in any group it is used to differentiate between \"us\" and \"them\".\nOrigin and development of folklore studies.\nFolklore began to distinguish itself as an autonomous discipline during the period of romantic nationalism in Europe. A particular figure in this development was Johann Gottfried von Herder, whose writings in the 1770s presented oral traditions as organic processes grounded in locale. After the German states were invaded by Napoleonic France, Herder's approach was adopted by many of his fellow Germans who systematized the recorded folk traditions and used them in their process of nation building. This process was enthusiastically embraced by smaller nations like Finland, Estonia, and Hungary, which were seeking political independence from their dominant neighbours.\nFolklore as a field of study further developed among 19th century European scholars who were contrasting tradition with the newly developing modernity. Its focus was the oral folklore of the rural peasant populations, which were considered as residue and survivals of the past that continued to exist within the lower strata of society. The \"Kinder- und Hausm\u00e4rchen\" of the Brothers Grimm (first published 1812) is the best known but by no means only collection of verbal folklore of the European peasantry of that time. This interest in stories, sayings and songs continued throughout the 19th century and aligned the fledgling discipline of folkloristics with literature and mythology. By the turn into the 20th century the number and sophistication of folklore studies and folklorists had grown both in Europe and North America. Whereas European folklorists remained focused on the oral folklore of the homogenous peasant populations in their regions, the American folklorists, led by Franz Boas and Ruth Benedict, chose to consider Native American cultures in their research, and included the totality of their customs and beliefs as folklore. This distinction aligned American folkloristics with cultural anthropology and ethnology, using the same techniques of data collection in their field research. This divided alliance of folkloristics between the humanities in Europe and the social sciences in America offers a wealth of theoretical vantage points and research tools to the field of folkloristics as a whole, even as it continues to be a point of discussion within the field itself.\nThe term \"folkloristics\", along with the alternative name \"folklore studies\", became widely used in the 1950s to distinguish the academic study of traditional culture from the folklore artifacts themselves. When the American Folklife Preservation Act (Public Law 94-201) was passed by the U.S. Congress in January 1976, to coincide with the Bicentennial Celebration, folkloristics in the United States came of age.\n\"\u2026[Folklife] means the traditional expressive culture shared within the various groups in the United States: familial, ethnic, occupational, religious, regional; expressive culture includes a wide range of creative and symbolic forms such as custom, belief, technical skill, language, literature, art, architecture, music, play, dance, drama, ritual, pageantry, handicraft; these expressions are mainly learned orally, by imitation, or in performance, and are generally maintained without benefit of formal instruction or institutional direction.\" \nAdded to the extensive array of other legislation designed to protect the natural and cultural heritage of the United States, this law also marks a shift in national awareness. It gives voice to a growing understanding that cultural diversity is a national strength and a resource worthy of protection. Paradoxically, it is a unifying feature, not something that separates the citizens of a country. \"We no longer view cultural difference as a problem to be solved, but as a tremendous opportunity. In the diversity of American folklife we find a marketplace teeming with the exchange of traditional forms and cultural ideas, a rich resource for Americans\". This diversity is celebrated annually at the Smithsonian Folklife Festival and many other folklife fests around the country.\nDefinition of \"folk\".\nThe folk of the 19th century, the social group identified in the original term \"folklore\", was characterized by being rural, illiterate and poor. They were the peasants living in the countryside, in contrast to the urban populace of the cities. Only toward the end of the century did the urban proletariat (on the coattails of Marxist theory) become included with the rural poor as folk. The common feature in this expanded definition of folk was their identification as the underclass of society.\nMoving forward into the 20th century, in tandem with new thinking in the , folklorists also revised and expanded their concept of the folk group. By the 1960s it was understood that social groups, i.e. folk groups, were all around us; each individual is enmeshed in a multitude of differing identities and their concomitant social groups. The first group that each of us is born into is the family, and each family has its own unique family folklore. As a child grows into an individual, its identities also increase to include age, language, ethnicity, occupation, etc. Each of these cohorts has its own folklore, and as one folklorist points out, this is \"not idle speculation\u2026 Decades of fieldwork have demonstrated conclusively that these groups do have their own folklore.\" In this modern understanding, folklore is a function of shared identity within any social group.\nThis folklore can include jokes, sayings and expected behavior in multiple variants, always transmitted in an informal manner. For the most part it will be learned by observation, imitation, repetition or correction by other group members. This informal knowledge is used to confirm and re-inforce the identity of the group. It can be used both internally within the group to express their common identity, for example in an initiation ceremony for new members. Or it can be used externally to differentiate the group from outsiders, like a folkdance demonstration at a community festival. Significant to folklorists here is that there are two opposing but equally valid ways to use this in the study of a group: you can start with an identified group in order to explore its folklore, or you can identify folklore items and use them to identify the social group.\nBeginning in the 1960s, a further expansion of the concept of folk began to unfold through the study of folklore. Individual researchers identified folk groups that had previously been overlooked and ignored. One notable example of this is found in an issue of the \"Journal of American Folklore\", published in 1975, which is dedicated exclusively to articles on women's folklore, with approaches that had not come from a man's perspective. Other groups that were highlighted as part of this broadened understanding of the folk group were non-traditional families, occupational groups, and families that pursued the production of folk items over multiple generations.\nFolklore genres.\nIndividual folklore artifacts are commonly classified as one of three types: material, verbal or customary lore. For the most part self-explanatory, these categories include physical objects (material folklore), common sayings, expressions, stories and songs (verbal folklore), and beliefs and ways of doing things (customary folklore). There is also a fourth major subgenre defined for children's folklore and games (childlore), as the collection and interpretation of this fertile topic is peculiar to school yards and neighborhood streets. Each of these genres and their subtypes is intended to organize and categorize the folklore artifacts; they provide common vocabulary and consistent labeling for folklorists to communicate with each other.\nThat said, each artifact is unique; in fact one of the characteristics of all folklore artifacts is their variation within genres and types. This is in direct contrast to manufactured goods, where the goal in production is to create identical products and any variations are considered mistakes. It is however just this required variation that makes identification and classification of the defining features a challenge. And while this classification is essential for the subject area of folkloristics, it remains just labeling, and adds little to an understanding of the traditional development and meaning of the artifacts themselves.\nNecessary as they are, genre classifications are misleading in their oversimplification of the subject area. Folklore artifacts are never self-contained, they do not stand in isolation but are particulars in the self-representation of a community. Different genres are frequently combined with each other to mark an event. So a birthday celebration might include a song or formulaic way of greeting the birthday child (verbal), presentation of a cake and wrapped presents (material), as well as customs to honor the individual, such as sitting at the head of the table, and blowing out the candles with a wish. There might also be special games played at birthday parties which are not generally played at other times. Adding to the complexity of the interpretation, the birthday party for a seven-year-old will not be identical to the birthday party for that same child as a six-year-old, even though they follow the same model. For each artifact embodies a single variant of a performance in a given time and space. The task of the folklorist becomes to identify within this surfeit of variables the constants and the expressed meaning that shimmer through all variations: honoring of the individual within the circle of family and friends, gifting to express their value and worth to the group, and of course, the festival food and drink as signifiers of the event.\nVerbal tradition.\nThe formal definition of verbal lore is words, both written and oral, that are \"spoken, sung, voiced forms of traditional utterance that show repetitive patterns.\" Crucial here are the repetitive patterns. Verbal lore is not just any conversation, but words and phrases conforming to a traditional configuration recognized by both the speaker and the audience. For narrative types by definition have consistent structure, and follow an existing model in their narrative form. As just one simple example, in English the phrase \"An elephant walks into a bar\u2026\" instantaneously flags the following text as a joke. It might be one you've already heard, but it might be one that the speaker has just thought up within the current context. Another example is the child's song Old MacDonald Had a Farm, where each performance is distinctive in the animals named, their order and their sounds. Songs such as this are used to express cultural values (farms are important, farmers are old and weather-beaten) and teach children about different domesticated animals.\nVerbal folklore was the original folklore, the artifacts defined by William Thoms as older, oral cultural traditions of the rural populace. In his 1846 published call for help in documenting antiquities, Thoms was echoing scholars from across the European continent to collect artifacts of verbal lore. By the beginning of the 20th century these collections had grown to include artifacts from around the world and across several centuries. A system to organize and categorize them became necessary. Antti Aarne published a first classification system for folktales in 1910. This was later expanded into the Aarne\u2013Thompson classification system by Stith Thompson and remains the standard classification system for European folktales and other types of oral literature. As the number of classified oral artifacts grew, similarities were noted in items that had been collected from very different geographic regions, ethnic groups and epochs, giving rise to the Historic\u2013Geographic Method, a methodology that dominated folkloristics in the first half of the 20th century.\nWhen William Thoms first published his appeal to document the verbal lore of the rural populations, it was believed these folk artifacts would die out as the population became literate. Over the past two centuries this belief has proven to be wrong; folklorists continue to collect verbal lore in both written and spoken form from all social groups. Some variants might have been captured in published collections, but much of it is still transmitted orally and indeed continues to be generated in new forms and variants at an alarming rate.\nBelow is listed a small sampling of types and examples of verbal lore.\nMaterial culture.\nThe genre of material culture includes all artifacts that can be touched, held, lived in, or eaten. They are tangible objects with a physical presence, either intended for permanent use or to be used at the next meal. Most of these folklore artifacts are single objects that have been created by hand for a specific purpose; however, folk artifacts can also be mass-produced, such as dreidels or Christmas decorations. These items continue to be considered folklore because of their long (pre-industrial) history and their customary use. All of these material objects \"existed prior to and continue alongside mechanized industry. \u2026 [They are] transmitted across the generations and subject to the same forces of conservative tradition and individual variation\" that are found in all folk artifacts. Folklorists are interested in the physical form, the method of manufacture or construction, the pattern of use, as well as the procurement of the raw materials. The meaning to those who both make and use these objects is important. Of primary significance in these studies is the complex balance of continuity over change in both their design and their decoration.\nIn Europe, prior to the Industrial Revolution, everything was made by hand. While some folklorists of the 19th century wanted to secure the oral traditions of the rural folk before the populace became literate, other folklorists sought to identify hand-crafted objects before their production processes were lost to industrial manufacturing. Just as verbal lore continues to be actively created and transmitted in today's culture, so these handicrafts can still be found all around us, with possibly a shift in purpose and meaning. There are many reasons for continuing to handmake objects for use, for example these skills may be needed to repair manufactured items, or a unique design might be required which is not (or cannot be) found in the stores. Many crafts are considered as simple home maintenance, such as cooking, sewing and carpentry. For many people, handicrafts have also become an enjoyable and satisfying hobby. Handmade objects are often regarded as prestigious, where extra time and thought is spent in their creation and their uniqueness is valued. For the folklorist, these hand-crafted objects embody multifaceted relationships in the lives of the craftsmen and the users, a concept that has been lost with mass-produced items that have no connection to an individual craftsman.\nMany traditional crafts, such as ironworking and glass-making, have been elevated to the fine or applied arts and taught in art schools; or they have been repurposed as folk art, characterized as objects whose decorative form supersedes their utilitarian needs. Folk art is found in hex signs on Pennsylvania Dutch barns, tin man sculptures made by metalworkers, front yard Christmas displays, decorated school lockers, carved gun stocks, and tattoos. \"Words such as naive, self-taught, and individualistic are used to describe these objects, and the exceptional rather than the representative creation is featured.\" This is in contrast to the understanding of folklore artifacts that are nurtured and passed along within a community.\nMany objects of material folklore are challenging to classify, difficult to archive, and unwieldy to store. The assigned task of museums is to preserve and make use of these bulky artifacts of material culture. To this end, the concept of the living museum has developed, beginning in Scandinavia at the end of the 19th century. These open-air museums not only display the artifacts, but also teach visitors how the items were used, with actors reenacting the everyday lives of people from all segments of society, relying heavily on the material artifacts of a pre-industrial society. Many locations even duplicate the processing of the objects, thus creating new objects of an earlier historic time period. Living museums are now found throughout the world as part of a thriving heritage industry.\nThis list represents just a small sampling of objects and skills that are included in studies of material culture.\nCustoms.\nCustomary culture is remembered enactment, i.e. re-enactment. It is the patterns of expected behavior within a group, the \"traditional and expected way of doing things\" A custom can be a single gesture, such as thumbs down or a handshake. It can also be a complex interaction of multiple folk customs and artifacts as seen in a child's birthday party, including verbal lore (Happy Birthday song), material lore (presents and a birthday cake), special games (Musical chairs) and individual customs (making a wish as you blow out the candles). Each of these is a folklore artifact in its own right, potentially worthy of investigation and cultural analysis. Together they combine to build the custom of a birthday party celebration, a scripted combination of multiple artifacts which have meaning within their social group.\nFolklorists divide customs into several different categories. A custom can be a seasonal celebration, such as Thanksgiving or New Year's. It can be a life cycle celebration for an individual, such as baptism, birthday or wedding. A custom can also mark a community festival or event; examples of this are Carnival in Cologne or Mardi Gras in New Orleans. This category also includes the Smithsonian Folklife Festival celebrated each summer on the Mall in Washington, DC. A fourth category includes customs related to folk beliefs. Walking under a ladder is just one of many symbols considered unlucky. Occupational groups tend to have a rich history of customs related to their life and work, so the traditions of sailors or lumberjacks. The area of ecclesiastical folklore, which includes modes of worship not sanctioned by the established church tends to be so large and complex that it is usually treated as a specialized area of folk customs; it requires considerable expertise in standard church ritual in order to adequately interpret folk customs and beliefs that originated in official church practice.\nCustomary folklore is always a performance, be it a single gesture or a complex of scripted customs, and participating in the custom, either as performer or audience, signifies acknowledgment of that social group. Some customary behavior is intended to be performed and understood only within the group itself, so the handkerchief code sometimes used in the gay community or the initiation rituals of the Freemasons. Other customs are designed specifically to represent a social group to outsiders, those who do not belong to this group. The St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York and in other communities across the continent is a single example of an ethnic group parading their separateness (differential behavior), and encouraging Americans of all stripes to show alliance to this colorful ethnic group.\nThese festivals and parades, with a target audience of people who do not belong to the social group, intersect with the interests and mission of public folklorists, who are engaged in the documentation, preservation, and presentation of traditional forms of folklife. With a swell in popular interest in folk traditions, these community celebrations are becoming more numerous throughout the western world. While ostensibly parading the diversity of their community, economic groups have discovered that these folk parades and festivals are good for business. All shades of people are out on the streets, eating, drinking and spending. This attracts support not only from the business community, but also from federal and state organizations for these local street parties. Paradoxically, in parading diversity within the community, these events have come to authenticate true community, where business interests ally with the varied (folk) social groups to promote the interests of the community as a whole.\nThis is just a small sampling of types and examples of customary lore.\nChildlore and games.\nChildlore is a distinct branch of folklore that deals with activities passed on by children to other children, away from the influence or supervision of an adult. Children's folklore contains artifacts from all the standard folklore genres of verbal, material, and customary lore; it is however the child-to-child conduit that distinguishes these artifacts. For childhood is a social group where children teach, learn and share their own traditions, flourishing in a street culture outside the purview of adults. This is also ideal where it needs to be collected; as Iona and Peter Opie demonstrated in their pioneering book \"Children's Games in Street and Playground\". Here the social group of children is studied on its own terms, not as a derivative of adult social groups. It is shown that the culture of children is quite distinctive; it is generally unnoticed by the sophisticated world of adults, and quite as little affected by it.\nOf particular interest to folklorists here is the mode of transmission of these artifacts; this lore circulates exclusively within an informal pre-literate children's network or folk group. It does not include artifacts taught to children by adults. However children can take the taught and teach it further to other children, turning it into childlore. Or they can take the artifacts and turn them into something else; so Old McDonald's farm is transformed from animal noises to the scatological version of animal poop. This childlore is characterized by \"its lack of dependence on literary and fixed form. Children\u2026operate among themselves in a world of informal and oral communication, unimpeded by the necessity of maintaining and transmitting information by written means. This is as close as folklorists can come to observing the transmission and social function of this folk knowledge before the spread of literacy during the 19th century.\nAs we have seen with the other genres, the original collections of children's lore and games in the 19th century was driven by a fear that the culture of childhood would die out. Early folklorists, among them Alice Gomme in Britain and William Wells Newell in the United States, felt a need to capture the unstructured and unsupervised street life and activities of children before it was lost. This fear proved to be unfounded. In a comparison of any modern school playground during recess and the painting of \"Children's Games\" by Pieter Breugel the Elder we can see that the activity level is similar, and many of the games from the 1560 painting are recognizable and comparable to modern variations still played today.\nThese same artifacts of childlore, in innumerable variations, also continue to serve the same function of learning and practicing skills needed for growth. So bouncing and swinging rhythms and rhymes encourage development of balance and coordination in infants and children. Verbal rhymes like Peter Piper picked... serve to increase both the oral and aural acuity of children. Songs and chants, accessing a different part of the brain, are used to memorize series (Alphabet song). They also provide the necessary beat to complex physical rhythms and movements, be it hand-clapping, jump roping, or ball bouncing. Furthermore, many physical games are used to develop strength, coordination and endurance of the players. For some team games, negotiations about the rules can run on longer than the game itself as social skills are rehearsed. Even as we are just now uncovering the neuroscience that undergirds the developmental function of this childlore, the artifacts themselves have been in play for centuries.\nBelow is listed just a small sampling of types and examples of childlore and games.\nFolk history.\nA case has been made for considering folk history as a distinct sub-category of folklore, an idea that has received attention from such folklorists as Richard Dorson. This field of study is represented in \"The Folklore Historian\", an annual journal sponsored by the History and Folklore Section of the American Folklore Society and concerned with the connections of folklore with history, as well as the history of folklore studies.\nThe study of folk history is particularly well developed in Ireland, where the \"Handbook of Irish Folklore\" (the standard book used by field workers of the Irish Folklore Commission) recognizes \"historical tradition\" as a separate category, traditionally referred to as \"seanchas\". Henry Glassie made a pioneering contribution in his classic study, \"Passing the Time in Ballymenone\". Another notable exponent is historian Guy Beiner who has presented in-depth studies of Irish folk history, identifying a number of characteristic genres for what he has named \"history telling\", such as stories (divided into tales and \"mini-histories\"), songs and ballads (especially rebel songs), poems, rhymes, toasts, prophecies, proverbs and sayings, place-names, and a variety of commemorative ritual practices. These are often recited by dedicated storytellers (\"seanchaithe\") and folk historians (\"staireolaithe\"). Beiner has since adopted the term \"vernacular historiography\" in an attempt to move beyond the confines of \"the artificial divides between oral and literary cultures that lie at the heart of conceptualizations of oral tradition\".\nFolklore performance in context.\nLacking context, folklore artifacts would be uninspiring objects without any life of their own. It is only through performance that the artifacts come alive as an active and meaningful component of a social group; the intergroup communication arises in the performance and this is where transmission of these cultural elements takes place. American folklorist Roger D. Abrahams has described it thus: \"Folklore is folklore only when performed. As organized entities of performance, items of folklore have a sense of control inherent in them, a power that can be capitalized upon and enhanced through effective performance.\" Without transmission, these items are not folklore, they are just individual quirky tales and objects.\nThis understanding in folkloristics only occurred in the second half of the 20th century, when the two terms \"folklore performance\" and \"text and context\" dominated discussions among folklorists. These terms are not contradictory or even mutually exclusive. As borrowings from other fields of study, one or the other linguistic formulation is more appropriate to any given discussion. Performance is frequently tied to verbal and customary lore, whereas context is used in discussions of material lore. Both formulations offer different perspectives on the same folkloric understanding, specifically that folklore artifacts need to remain embedded in their cultural environment if we are to gain insight into their meaning for the community.\nThe concept of cultural (folklore) performance is shared with ethnography and anthropology among other social sciences. The cultural anthropologist Victor Turner identified four universal characteristics of cultural performance: playfulness, framing, the use of symbolic language, and employing the subjunctive mood. In viewing the performance, the audience leaves the daily reality to move into a mode of make-believe, or \"what if?\" It is self-evident that this fits well with all types of verbal lore, where reality has no place among the symbols, fantasies, and nonsense of traditional tales, proverbs, and jokes. Customs and the lore of children and games also fit easily into the language of a folklore performance.\nMaterial culture requires some moulding to turn it into a performance. Should we consider the performance of the creation of the artifact, as in a quilting party, or the performance of the recipients who use the quilt to cover their marriage bed? Here the language of context works better to describe the quilting of patterns copied from the grandmother, quilting as a social event during the winter months, or the gifting of a quilt to signify the importance of the event. Each of these\u2014the traditional pattern chosen, the social event, and the gifting\u2014occur within the broader context of the community. Even so, when considering context, the structure and characteristics of performance can be recognized, including an audience, a framing event, and the use of decorative figures and symbols, all of which go beyond the utility of the object.\nBackstory.\nBefore the Second World War, folk artifacts had been understood and collected as cultural shards of an earlier time. They were considered individual vestigial artifacts, with little or no function in the contemporary culture. Given this understanding, the goal of the folklorist was to capture and document them before they disappeared. They were collected with no supporting data, bound in books, archived and classified more or less successfully. The Historic\u2013Geographic Method worked to isolate and track these collected artifacts, mostly verbal lore, across space and time.\nFollowing the Second World War, folklorists began to articulate a more holistic approach toward their subject matter. In tandem with the growing sophistication in the , attention was no longer limited to the isolated artifact, but extended to include the artifact embedded in an active cultural environment. One early proponent was Alan Dundes with his essay \"Texture, Text and Context\", first published 1964. A public presentation in 1967 by Dan Ben-Amos at the American Folklore Society brought the behavioral approach into open debate among folklorists. In 1972 Richard Dorson called out the \"young Turks\" for their movement toward a behavioral approach to folklore. This approach \"shifted the conceptualization of folklore as an extractable item or 'text' to an emphasis on folklore as a kind of human behavior and communication. Conceptualizing folklore as behavior redefined the job of folklorists...\"\nFolklore became a verb, an action, something that people do, not just something that they have. It is in the performance and the active context that folklore artifacts get transmitted in informal, direct communication, either verbally or in demonstration. Performance includes all the different modes and manners in which this transmission occurs.\nTradition-bearer and audience.\nTransmission is a communicative process requiring a binary: one individual or group who actively transmits information in some form to another individual or group. Each of these is a defined role in the folklore process. The tradition-bearer is the individual who actively passes along the knowledge of an artifact; this can be either a mother singing a lullaby to her baby, or an Irish dance troupe performing at a local festival. They are named individuals, usually well known in the community as knowledgeable in their traditional lore. They are not the anonymous \"folk\", the nameless mass without of history or individuality.\nThe audience of this performance is the other half in the transmission process; they listen, watch, and remember. Few of them will become active tradition-bearers; many more will be passive tradition-bearers who maintain a memory of this specific traditional artifact, in both its presentation and its content.\nThere is active communication between the audience and the performer. The performer is presenting to the audience; the audience in turn, through its actions and reactions, is actively communicating with the performer. The purpose of this performance is not to create something new but to re-create something that already exists; the performance is words and actions which are known, recognized and valued by both the performer and the audience. For folklore is first and foremost remembered behavior. As members of the same cultural reference group, they identify and value this performance as a piece of shared cultural knowledge.\nFraming the performance.\nTo initiate the performance, there must be a frame of some sort to indicate that what is to follow is indeed performance. The frame brackets it as outside of normal discourse. In customary lore such as life cycle celebrations (ex. birthday) or dance performances, the framing occurs as part of the event, frequently marked by location. The audience goes to the event location to participate. Games are defined primarily by rules, it is with the initiation of the rules that the game is framed. The folklorist Barre Toelken describes an evening spent in a Navaho family playing string figure games, with each of the members shifting from performer to audience as they create and display different figures to each other.\nIn verbal lore, the performer will start and end with recognized linguistic formulas. An easy example is seen in the common introduction to a joke: \"Have you heard the one...\", \"Joke of the day...\", or \"An elephant walks into a bar\". Each of these signals to the listeners that the following is a joke, not to be taken literally. The joke is completed with the punch line of the joke. Another traditional narrative marker in English is the framing of a fairy tale between the phrases \"Once upon a time\" and \"They all lived happily ever after.\" Many languages have similar phrases which are used to frame a traditional tale. Each of these linguistic formulas removes the bracketed text from ordinary discourse, and marks it as a recognized form of stylized, formulaic communication for both the performer and the audience.\nIn the subjunctive voice.\nFraming as a narrative device serves to signal to both the story teller and the audience that the narrative which follows is indeed a fiction (verbal lore), and not to be understood as historical fact or reality. It moves the framed narration into the subjunctive mood, and marks a space in which \"fiction, history, story, tradition, art, teaching, all exist within the narrated or performed expressive 'event' outside the normal realms and constraints of reality or time.\" This shift from the realis to the irrealis mood is understood by all participants within the reference group. It enables these fictional events to contain meaning for the group, and can lead to very real consequences.\nAnderson's law of auto-correction.\nThe theory of self-correction in folklore transmission was first articulated by the folklorist Walter Anderson in the 1920s; this posits a feedback mechanism which would keep folklore variants closer to the original form.\nThis theory addresses the question about how, with multiple performers and multiple audiences, the artifact maintains its identity across time and geography. Anderson credited the audience with censoring narrators who deviated too far from the known (traditional) text.\nAny performance is a two-way communication process. The performer addresses the audience with words and actions; the audience in turn actively responds to the performer. If this performance deviates too far from audience expectations of the familiar folk artifact, they will respond with negative feedback. Wanting to avoid more negative reaction, the performer will adjust his performance to conform to audience expectations. \"Social reward by an audience [is] a major factor in motivating narrators...\" It is this dynamic feedback loop between performer and audience which gives stability to the text of the performance.\nIn reality, this model is not so simplistic; there is multiple redundancy in the active folklore process. The performer has heard the tale multiple times, he has heard it from different story tellers in multiple versions. In turn, he tells the tale multiple times to the same or a different audience, and they expect to hear the version they know. This expanded model of redundancy in a non-linear narrative process makes it difficult to innovate during any single performance; corrective feedback from the audience will be immediate. \"At the heart of both autopoetic self-maintenance and the 'virality' of meme transmission... it is enough to assume that some sort of recursive action maintains a degree of integrity [of the artifact] in certain features ... sufficient to allow us to recognize it as an instance of its type.\"\nContext of material lore.\nFor material folk artifacts, it becomes more fruitful to return to the terminology of Alan Dundes: text and context. Here the text designates the physical artifact itself, the single item made by an individual for a specific purpose. The context is then unmasked by observation and questions concerning both its production and its usage. Why was it made, how was it made, who will use it, how will they use it, where did the raw materials come from, who designed it, etc. These questions are limited only by the skill of the interviewer.\nIn his study of southeastern Kentucky chair makers, Michael Owen Jones describes production of a chair within the context of the life of the craftsman. For Henry Glassie in his study of Folk Housing in Middle Virginia the investigation concerns the historical pattern he finds repeated in the dwellings of this region: the house is planted in the landscape just as the landscape completes itself with the house. The artisan in his roadside stand or shop in the nearby town wants to make and display products which appeal to customers. There is \"a craftsperson's eagerness to produce 'satisfactory items' due to a close personal contact with the customer and expectations to serve the customer again.\" Here the role of consumer \"... is the basic force responsible for the continuity and discontinuity of behavior.\"\nIn material culture the context becomes the cultural environment in which the object is made (chair), used (house), and sold (wares). None of these artisans is \"anonymous\" folk; they are individuals making a living with the tools and skills learned within and valued in the context of their community.\nToelken's conservative-dynamic continuum.\nNo two performances are identical. The performer attempts to keep the performance within expectations, but this happens despite a multitude of changing variables. He has given this performance one time more or less, the audience is different, the social and political environment has changed. In the context of material culture, no two hand-crafted items are identical. Sometimes these deviations in the performance and the production are unintentional, just part of the process. But sometimes these deviations are intentional; the performer or artisan want to play with the boundaries of expectation and add their own creative touch. They perform within the tension of conserving the recognized form and adding innovation.\nThe folklorist Barre Toelken identifies this tension as \"... a combination of both changing (\"dynamic\") and static (\"conservative\") elements that evolve and change through sharing, communication and performance.\" Over time, the cultural context shifts and morphs: new leaders, new technologies, new values, new awareness. As the context changes, so must the artifact, for without modifications to map existing artifacts into the evolving cultural landscape, they lose their meaning. Joking as an active form of verbal lore makes this tension visible as joke cycles come and go to reflect new issues of concern. Once an artifact is no longer applicable to the context, transmission becomes a nonstarter; it loses relevancy for a contemporary audience. If it is not transmitted, then it is no longer folklore and becomes instead an historic relic.\nIn the electronic age.\nIt is too soon to identify how the advent of electronic communications will modify and change the performance and transmission of folklore artifacts. Just by looking at the development of one type of verbal lore, electronic joking, it is clear that the internet is modifying folkloric process, not killing it. Jokes and joking are as plentiful as ever both in traditional face-to-face interactions and through electronic transmission. New communication modes are also transforming traditional stories into many different configurations. The fairy tale Snow White is now offered in multiple media forms for both children and adults, including a television show and video game.\nA more generalized analysis of folklore in the electronic age will have to wait for further studies to be published in the field."}
{"id": "11304", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11304", "title": "Fusion cuisine", "text": "Fusion cuisine is cuisine that combines elements of different culinary traditions that originate from different countries, regions, or cultures. Cuisines of this type are not categorized according to any one particular cuisine style and have played a part in innovations of many contemporary restaurant cuisines since the 1970s.\nCategories and types.\nFusion food is a general term for the combination of various forms of cookery and comes in several forms. Even though fusion food is often the invention by chefs, fusion cuisine can occur naturally within the different cuisines of a region or sub-region. These can include larger regions, such as East Asian cuisine, European cuisine, and Southwestern American cuisine, as well as more specific and lauded ethnic cuisines such as Chinese cuisine, Japanese cuisine, Korean cuisine, French cuisine, Italian cuisine, and New Mexican cuisine.\nChefs within Asian fusion restaurants combine the various cuisines of different Asian countries, have become popular in many parts of the United States and United Kingdom. Often featured are East Asian, Southeast Asian, and South Asian dishes alongside one another and offering dishes that are inspired combinations of such cuisines. California cuisine is considered a fusion culture, taking inspiration particularly from Italy, France, Mexico, the idea of the European delicatessen, and East Asia, and then creating traditional dishes from these cultures with non-traditional ingredients - such as California pizza. One major example is Oceanic cuisine, which combines the different cuisines of the various island nations. In the United Kingdom, fish and chips can be seen as an early fusion dish due to its marrying of ingredients stemming from Jewish, French, and Belgian cuisines. Filipino cuisine is also sometimes characterized as the \"original Asian fusion cuisine\", combining native culinary traditions and ingredients with the very different cuisines of Spain, Latin America, China, and the United States, among others, due to its unique colonial history.\nIn Australia, due to the increasing influx of migrants, fusion cuisine is being reinvented and is becoming increasingly the norm at numerous cafes and restaurants, with Modern Australian Asian-fusion restaurants like Tetsuya's in Sydney ranking highly in The World's 50 Best Restaurants. Another incarnation of fusion cuisine implements a more eclectic approach, which generally features original dishes that combine varieties of ingredients from various cuisines and regions. Such a restaurant might feature a wide variety of dishes inspired by a combination of various regional cuisines with new ideas. Foods in Malaysia (also Indonesia) are another popular example of fusion cuisine between Malay, Javanese, Chinese and Indian and light influences from Thai, Portuguese, Dutch, and British cuisines.\nFoods based on one culture, but prepared using ingredients and flavors inherent to another culture, are also considered forms of fusion cuisine. For instance, pizza made with cheddar and pepper jack cheese, salsa, refried beans or other common taco ingredients is often marketed as \"Taco Pizza\". This particular dish is a fusion of Italian and Mexican cuisines. Similar approaches have been used for fusion-sushi, such as rolling maki with different types of rice and ingredients such as curry and basmati rice, cheese and salsa with Spanish rice, or spiced ground lamb and capers rolled with Greek-style rice and grape leaves, which resembles inside-out dolmades. Some fusion cuisines have themselves become accepted as a national cuisine, as with Peruvian Nikkei cuisine, which combines Japanese spices and seasonings and Peruvian ingredients like aj\u00ed (Peruvian peppers) with seafood. A quintessential Peruvian Nikkei dish is 'Maki Acevichado' or ceviche roll, containing Peruvian-style marinated fish rolled up with rice, avocado, or seaweed.\"\nBackground.\nThis type of restaurant's success depends on a number of factors. Among these are:\nWolfgang Puck is attributed as one of the pioneers of fusion cuisine, with some dispute. However, his restaurant \"Chinois on Main\" was named after the term attributed to Richard Wing, who in the 1960s combined French and Chinese cooking at the former Imperial Dynasty restaurant in Hanford, California."}
{"id": "11306", "revid": "1008167567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11306", "title": "Frame problem", "text": "In artificial intelligence, the frame problem describes an issue with using first-order logic to express facts about a robot in the world. Representing the state of a robot with first-order logic requires the use of many axioms that simply imply that things in the environment do not change arbitrarily. For example, Hayes describes a \"block world\" with rules about stacking blocks together. The frame problem is the problem of finding adequate collections of axioms for a viable description of a robot environment.\nJohn McCarthy and Patrick J. Hayes defined this problem in their 1969 article, \"Some Philosophical Problems from the Standpoint of Artificial Intelligence\". In this paper, and many that came after, the formal mathematical problem was a starting point for more general discussions of the difficulty of knowledge representation for artificial intelligence. Issues such as how to provide rational default assumptions and what humans consider common sense in a virtual environment. Later, the term acquired a broader meaning in philosophy, where it is formulated as the problem of limiting the beliefs that have to be updated in response to actions. In the logical context, actions are typically specified by what they change, with the implicit assumption that everything else (the frame) remains unchanged.\nDescription.\nThe frame problem occurs even in very simple domains. A scenario with a door, which can be open or closed, and a light, which can be on or off, is statically represented by two propositions formula_1 and formula_2. If these conditions can change, they are better represented by two predicates formula_3 and formula_4 that depend on time; such predicates are called fluents. A domain in which the door is closed and the light off at time 0, and the door opened at time 1, can be directly represented in logic by the following formulae:\nThe first two formulae represent the initial situation; the third formula represents the effect of executing the action of opening the door at time 1. If such an action had preconditions, such as the door being unlocked, it would have been represented by formula_8. In practice, one would have a predicate formula_9 for specifying when an action is executed and a rule formula_10 for specifying the effects of actions. The article on the situation calculus gives more details.\nWhile the three formulae above are a direct expression in logic of what is known, they do not suffice to correctly draw consequences. While the following conditions (representing the expected situation) are consistent with the three formulae above, they are not the only ones.\nIndeed, another set of conditions that is consistent with the three formulae above is:\nThe frame problem is that specifying only which conditions are changed by the actions does not entail that all other conditions are not changed. This problem can be solved by adding the so-called \u201cframe axioms\u201d, which explicitly specify that all conditions not affected by actions are not changed while executing that action. For example, since the action executed at time 0 is that of opening the door, a frame axiom would state that the status of the light does not change from time 0 to time 1:\nThe frame problem is that one such frame axiom is necessary for every pair of action and condition such that the action does not affect the condition. In other words, the problem is that of formalizing a dynamical domain without explicitly specifying the frame axioms.\nThe solution proposed by McCarthy to solve this problem involves assuming that a minimal amount of condition changes have occurred; this solution is formalized using the framework of circumscription. The Yale shooting problem, however, shows that this solution is not always correct. Alternative solutions were then proposed, involving predicate completion, fluent occlusion, successor state axioms, etc.; they are explained below. By the end of the 1980s, the frame problem as defined by McCarthy and Hayes was solved. Even after that, however, the term \u201cframe problem\u201d was still used, in part to refer to the same problem but under different settings (e.g., concurrent actions), and in part to refer to the general problem of representing and reasoning with dynamical domains.\nSolutions.\nThe following solutions depict how the frame problem is solved in various formalisms. The formalisms themselves are not presented in full: what is presented are simplified versions that are sufficient to explain the full solution.\nFluent occlusion solution.\nThis solution was proposed by Erik Sandewall, who also defined a formal language for the specification of dynamical domains; therefore, such a domain can be first expressed in this language and then automatically translated into logic. In this article, only the expression in logic is shown, and only in the simplified language with no action names.\nThe rationale of this solution is to represent not only the value of conditions over time, but also whether they can be affected by the last executed action. The latter is represented by another condition, called occlusion. A condition is said to be \"occluded\" in a given time point if an action has been just executed that makes the condition true or false as an effect. Occlusion can be viewed as \u201cpermission to change\u201d: if a condition is occluded, it is relieved from obeying the constraint of inertia.\nIn the simplified example of the door and the light, occlusion can be formalized by two predicates formula_12 and formula_13. The rationale is that a condition can change value only if the corresponding occlusion predicate is true at the next time point. In turn, the occlusion predicate is true only when an action affecting the condition is executed.\nIn general, every action making a condition true or false also makes the corresponding occlusion predicate true. In this case, formula_19 is true, making the antecedent of the fourth formula above false for formula_20; therefore, the constraint that formula_21 does not hold for formula_20. Therefore, formula_1 can change value, which is also what is enforced by the third formula.\nIn order for this condition to work, occlusion predicates have to be true only when they are made true as an effect of an action. This can be achieved either by circumscription or by predicate completion. It is worth noticing that occlusion does not necessarily imply a change: for example, executing the action of opening the door when it was already open (in the formalization above) makes the predicate formula_24 true and makes formula_1 true; however, formula_1 has not changed value, as it was true already.\nPredicate completion solution.\nThis encoding is similar to the fluent occlusion solution, but the additional predicates denote change, not permission to change. For example, formula_27 represents the fact that the predicate formula_1 will change from time formula_29 to formula_30. As a result, a predicate changes if and only if the corresponding change predicate is true. An action results in a change if and only if it makes true a condition that was previously false or vice versa.\nThe third formula is a different way of saying that opening the door causes the door to be opened. Precisely, it states that opening the door changes the state of the door if it had been previously closed. The last two conditions state that a condition changes value at time formula_29 if and only if the corresponding change predicate is true at time formula_29. To complete the solution, the time points in which the change predicates are true have to be as few as possible, and this can be done by applying predicate completion to the rules specifying the effects of actions.\nSuccessor state axioms solution.\nThe value of a condition after the execution of an action can be determined by\nthe fact that the condition is true if and only if:\nA successor state axiom is a formalization in logic of these two facts. For\nexample, if formula_38 and formula_39 are two\nconditions used to denote that the action executed at time formula_29 was\nto open or close the door, respectively, the running example is encoded as\nfollows.\nThis solution is centered around the value of conditions, rather than the\neffects of actions. In other words, there is an axiom for every condition,\nrather than a formula for every action. Preconditions to actions (which are not\npresent in this example) are formalized by other formulae. The successor state\naxioms are used in the variant to the situation calculus proposed by\nRay Reiter.\nFluent calculus solution.\nThe fluent calculus is a variant of the situation calculus. It solves the frame problem by using first-order logic\nterms, rather than predicates, to represent the states. Converting\npredicates into terms in first-order logic is called reification; the\nfluent calculus can be seen as a logic in which predicates representing the\nstate of conditions are reified.\nThe difference between a predicate and a term in first-order logic is that a term is a representation of an object (possibly a complex object composed of other objects), while a predicate represents a condition that can be true or false when evaluated over a given set of terms.\nIn the fluent calculus, each possible state is represented by a term obtained by composition of other terms, each one representing the conditions that are true in state. For example, the state in which the door is open and the light is on is represented by the term formula_45. It is important to notice that a term is not true or false by itself, as it is an object and not a condition. In other words, the term formula_45 represent a possible state, and does not by itself mean that this is the current state. A separate condition can be stated to specify that this is actually the state at a given time, e.g., formula_47 means that this is the state at time formula_48.\nThe solution to the frame problem given in the fluent calculus is to specify the effects of actions by stating how a term representing the state changes when the action is executed. For example, the action of opening the door at time 0 is represented by the formula:\nThe action of closing the door, which makes a condition false instead of true, is represented in a slightly different way:\nThis formula works provided that suitable axioms are given about formula_51 and formula_52, e.g., a term containing the same condition twice is not a valid state (for example, formula_53 is always false for every formula_54 and formula_29).\nEvent calculus solution.\nThe event calculus uses terms for representing fluents, like the fluent calculus, but also has axioms constraining the value of fluents, like the successor state axioms. In the event calculus, inertia is enforced by formulae stating that a fluent is true if it has been true at a given previous time point and no action changing it to false has been performed in the meantime. Predicate completion is still needed in the event calculus for obtaining that a fluent is made true only if an action making it true has been performed, but also for obtaining that an action had been performed only if that is explicitly stated.\nDefault logic solution.\nThe frame problem can be thought of as the problem of formalizing the principle that, by default, \"everything is presumed to remain in the state in which it is\" (Leibniz, \"An Introduction to a Secret Encyclop\u00e6dia\", \"c\". 1679). This default, sometimes called the \"commonsense law of inertia\", was expressed by Raymond Reiter in default logic:\n(if formula_57 is true in situation formula_54, and it can be assumed that formula_57 remains true after executing action formula_60, then we can conclude that formula_57 remains true).\nSteve Hanks and Drew McDermott argued, on the basis of their Yale shooting example, that this solution to the frame problem is unsatisfactory. Hudson Turner showed, however, that it works correctly in the presence of appropriate additional postulates.\nAnswer set programming solution.\nThe counterpart of the default logic solution in the language of answer set programming is a rule with strong negation:\n(if formula_63 is true at time formula_64, and it can be assumed that formula_63 remains true at time formula_66, then we can conclude that formula_63 remains true).\nSeparation logic solution.\nSeparation logic is a formalism for reasoning about computer programs using pre/post specifications of the form formula_68. Separation logic is an extension of Hoare logic oriented to reasoning about mutable data structures in computer memory and other dynamic resources, and it has a special connective *, pronounced \"and separately\", to support independent reasoning about disjoint memory regions.\nSeparation logic employs a \"tight\" interpretation of pre/post specs, which say that the code can \"only\" access memory locations guaranteed to exist by the precondition. This leads to the soundness of the most important inference rule of the logic, the \"frame rule\"\nformula_69\nThe frame rule allows descriptions of arbitrary memory outside the footprint (memory accessed) of the code to be added to a specification: this enables the initial specification to concentrate only on the footprint. For example, the inference\nformula_70\ncaptures that code which sorts a list \"x\" does not unsort a separate list \"y,\" and it does this without mentioning \"y\" at all in the initial spec above the line.\nAutomation of the frame rule has led to significant increases in the scalability of automated reasoning techniques for code, eventually deployed industrially to codebases with 10s of millions of lines.\nThere appears to be some similarity between the separation logic solution to the frame problem and that of the fluent calculus mentioned above.\nAction description languages.\nAction description languages elude the frame problem rather than solving it. An action description language is a formal language with a syntax that is specific for describing situations and actions. For example, that the action formula_71 makes the door open if not locked is expressed by:\nThe semantics of an action description language depends on what the language can express (concurrent actions, delayed effects, etc.) and is usually based on transition systems.\nSince domains are expressed in these languages rather than directly in logic, the frame problem only arises when a specification given in an action description logic is to be translated into logic. Typically, however, a translation is given from these languages to answer set programming rather than first-order logic."}
{"id": "11307", "revid": "38344079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11307", "title": "Frans Eemil Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4", "text": "Frans Eemil Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 () (16 September 1888 \u2013 3 June 1964) was one of the most famous Finnish writers and in 1939 became the first Finnish writer to be awarded the Nobel Prize for literature \"for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature\". His best-known novels include \"\" (\"Nuorena nukkunut\") from 1931.\nEarly life.\nFrans Eemil Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 was born into a peasant farming family in H\u00e4meenkyr\u00f6. Although his parents were poor, they managed to send him to school in Tampere. At school Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 was a good student and with aid from his benefactor Henrik Liljeroos he entered the University of Helsinki in 1908 to study medicine. Here his acquaintances included the painters Eero J\u00e4rnefelt and Pekka Halonen, composer Jean Sibelius and author Juhani Aho.\nCareer.\nFive years later, in 1913 Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 moved from Helsinki to his old home village and devoted himself to writing. In 1914 Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 wrote articles for the newspaper \"Uusi Suometar\". In 1916 Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 married Sigrid Maria Salom\u00e4ki, whom he had met in 1914.\nBy principle, Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 was against all forms of violence and believed in scientific optimism. In his work he portrayed rural people as living united with the land.\nThe novel \"Hurskas kurjuus\" (Meek Heritage) (1919) depicted the reasons for Finnish Civil War, and despite its objectivity, was controversial at the time.\nSillanp\u00e4\u00e4 won international fame for his novel \"Nuorena nukkunut\" (translated to English as \"The Maid Silja\") in 1931.\nIn 1939, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature \"for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature.\" A few days after he received the prize, talks between Finland and Soviet Union broke down and the Winter War began. Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 donated the golden medal to be melted for funds to aid the war effort.\nBefore the Winter War, Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 wrote the lyrics for what is known as \"Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4n marssilaulu\" to lift his spirits when his eldest son Esko was partaking in military practices at Karelian Isthmus.\nIn 1939 his wife Sigrid died of pneumonia leaving eight children with Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4. Some time after, Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 married his secretary Anna von Hertzen (1900-1983) and traveled to Stockholm to receive the Nobel prize.\nIn 1941 Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 divorced his wife Anna. His alcoholism and other ailments needed hospital treatment. In 1943 he returned to public life as a bearded old 'Grandpa Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4'. His radio appearances, especially his tradition of talking on Christmas Eve from 1945 to 1963 became very popular.\nThe asteroid 1446 Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4, discovered on January 26, 1938 by the renowned Finnish astronomer and physicist Yrj\u00f6 V\u00e4is\u00e4l\u00e4, was named after him.\nDeath.\nSillanp\u00e4\u00e4 died on 3 June 1964 in Helsinki aged 75.\nFilms.\nNumerous of his works have been made into films:"}
{"id": "11310", "revid": "4288359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11310", "title": "February 27", "text": ""}
{"id": "11311", "revid": "4288359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11311", "title": "February 28", "text": "It is the last day of February for common years and the penultimate day of the aforementioned month for leap years."}
{"id": "11312", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11312", "title": "Flambards", "text": "Flambards is a novel for children or young adults by K. M. Peyton, first published by Oxford University Press in 1967 with illustrations by Victor Ambrus. Alternatively, \"Flambards\" is the trilogy (1967\u20131969) or series (1967\u20131981) named after its first book. The series is set in England just before, during, and after World War I.\nThe novel \"Flambards\" (book one) features a teenage orphan and heiress Christina Parsons, who comes to live at Flambards, the impoverished Essex estate owned by her crippled and tyrannical uncle, William Russell, and his two sons, Mark and Will.\nNovel summary.\nChristina Parsons, who has been shunted around the family since she was orphaned at the age of five years in 1901, is sent to live at Flambards with her mother's half-brother, the crippled Russell. Her Aunt Grace speculates that Russell plans for Christina to marry his son Mark to restore Flambards to its former glory using the money that she will inherit on her twenty-first birthday. Mark is as brutish as his father, with a great love for hunting, whereas the younger son William is terrified of horses after a hunting accident and aspires to be an aviator. Christina soon finds friendship with the injured William, who challenges her ideas on class boundaries, as well as her love for horses and hunting. William and Christina eventually fall in love and run away from the hunt ball to London, hoping to marry.\nSeries.\nThe fourth book controversially reversed the ending of the original trilogy, twelve years later and following the television series.\nFor \"The Edge of the Cloud\", Peyton won the annual Carnegie Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book by a British subject. She was a commended runner-up for both the first and third books, the latter in competition with her Medal-winning work.\nShe also won the 1970 Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, conferred by \"The Guardian\" newspaper and judged by a panel of British children's writers. Ordinarily the prize recognises one fiction book published during the preceding calendar year; exceptionally Peyton won for the Flambards trilogy completed in 1969.\nThe trilogy was adapted as a 13-part television series in 1979, \"Flambards\" starring Christine McKenna as Christina Parsons.\nWorld Publishing issued a US edition of the first book in 1968, retaining the Ambrus illustrations. World (Cleveland and New York) also published US editions of the second and third books in 1969 and 1970, also with the original illustrations, although all three novels were reset with a greater page-counts."}
{"id": "11313", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11313", "title": "Father Ted", "text": "Father Ted is a sitcom created by Irish writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews and produced by British production company Hat Trick Productions for Channel 4. It aired over three series from 21 April 1995 until 1 May 1998, including a Christmas special, for a total of 25 episodes. It aired on RT\u00c9 Two in Ireland, on Nine Network (series 1) and ABC Television (series 2 and 3) in Australia, and on TV3 in New Zealand.\nSet on the fictional Craggy Island, a remote location off Ireland's west coast \"Father Ted\" starred Dermot Morgan as Father Ted Crilly, alongside fellow priests Father Dougal McGuire (Ardal O'Hanlon) and Father Jack Hackett (Frank Kelly). Exiled on the island, the priests live together in the parochial house with their housekeeper Mrs Doyle (Pauline McLynn). \n\"Father Ted\" won several BAFTA awards, twice winning for Best Comedy Series, and remains a popular sitcom in the UK and Ireland. In a 2001 poll by Channel 4, Dougal was ranked fifth on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In 2019, \"Father Ted\" was named the second-greatest British sitcom, after \"Fawlty Towers\", by a panel of comedy experts for the \"Radio Times\".\nSynopsis.\nThe show follows the misadventures of three Irish Roman Catholic priests who live in a parish on the fictional Craggy Island, located off the west coast of Ireland. Father Ted Crilly, Father Dougal McGuire and Father Jack Hackett live chaotically together in Craggy Island's parochial house, along with their housekeeper Mrs Doyle, who always wants to serve them tea.\nThe three priests answer to Bishop Len Brennan, who has banished them to Craggy Island as punishment for different incidents in their past: Ted for alleged financial impropriety (apparently involving some money 'resting' in his account and a child being deprived of a visit to Lourdes so that Ted could go to Las Vegas), Dougal for something only referred to as the \"Blackrock Incident\" (resulting in many nuns' \"lives [being] irreparably damaged\"), and Jack for his alcoholism and womanising, particularly for an incident at a wedding in Athlone.\nThe show revolves around the priests' lives on Craggy Island, sometimes dealing with matters of the church but more often dealing with Father Ted's schemes to either resolve a situation with the parish or other Craggy Island residents, or to win games of one-upmanship against his enemy, Father Dick Byrne of the nearby Rugged Island parish.\nEpisodes.\n\"Father Ted\" ran for three series from 1995 to 1998, including a Christmas special. A total of 25 episodes were produced.\nProduction.\nWriting.\nLinehan and Mathews first met while working at \"Hot Press\". In the late 1980s, Mathews, Paul Woodfull and Kieran Woodfull formed The Joshua Trio, a U2 tribute band. The trio began writing comedy sketches to accompany their act. Mathews created the Father Ted character for his short-lived stand-up routine. Before The Joshua Trio played at gigs, Mathews would occasionally come on-stage as Father Ted and tell jokes involving his great friend, Father Dougal McGuire.\nIn 1991, Mathews left his job at \"Hot Press\" and moved into Linehan's London home. Over the next three to four years, they worked on rough ideas for shows while at the same time writing for sketch shows such as \"The All New Alexei Sayle Show\" and \"The Fast Show\". One of these ideas was for a comedy mockumentary series called \"Irish Lives\", with six episodes, each focusing on a different character living somewhere in Ireland. They scripted an episode centring on a priest named Father Ted Crilly, who visits his friends in the seminary in Maynooth College. Producer Geoffrey Perkins suggested that the episode's concept be dramatised and rewritten as a sitcom.\nIn the January 1994 issue of In Dublin (Vol 19, No2), Mathews and Linehan told Damian Corless, who had initially introduced the pair to each other, of their work in progress, describing Ted as \"basically a nice man\", Dougal as \"nice but really stupid\" and Jack as \"a hideous creature\". Linehan revealed: \"They've all been sent to this isolated place called Craggy Island because they're crap priests.\" Mathews elaborated: \"They've each a terrible secret which is why they've been banished to this place, and the terrible thing is that they can't get away from each other. Obviously it's not entirely reality based.\" Mathews was originally intended to play Ted, but decided he lacked the acting ability the role required. Maurice O'Donoghue, who plays Father Dick in the series, was their second choice for the role of Ted, being the right age and having a similar look and lightness. Mathews always preferred Dermot Morgan; Linehan was initially reluctant, fearing he would play Ted the same as \"Father Trendy\", a character he played on the RT\u00c9 television show \"The Live Mike\", but Morgan lobbied hard for the role and was cast.\nThe show was pitched directly to the UK's Hat Trick Productions and Channel 4 by the duo, contrary to rumours that RT\u00c9 (the Irish national broadcaster) were originally offered the series but rejected it.\nRecording.\nThree series and one Christmas special were aired. Declan Lowney directed the first two series and the Christmas special, while the third series was directed by Linehan (location scenes) and Andy De Emmony (studio scenes). In addition, Morgan and O'Hanlon hosted an hour of Comic Relief in character, during which Kelly and McLynn also made brief guest appearances. One day after the shooting of series three wrapped, Dermot Morgan died of a heart attack, aged 45. As a mark of respect, the third series was first broadcast a week later than originally planned.\nThe show was already scheduled to conclude with the third season prior to Morgan's death, as Morgan said that he did not want to continue playing the role of Father Ted for fear of being typecast: \"I don't want to be the next Clive Dunn and end up playing the same character for years.\"\nFollowing Morgan's death, the production company received calls from numerous agents and casting directors suggesting either new actors for the role of Ted or spin-offs without the character; Linehan and Mathews declined all offers.\nMusic.\nIn 1994, the writers asked alternative rock band Pulp to compose the theme music for \"Father Ted\", requesting a parody of a typical sitcom theme. When Pulp declined involvement, they contacted Neil Hannon, frontman of Northern Irish chamber pop band The Divine Comedy. Hannon's first effort, a jaunty composition, was rejected on Geoffrey Perkins's advice. Hannon composed a second theme, which the team found acceptable. This theme was recorded by Hannon and co-producer Darren Allison at The Jesus and Mary Chain's private studio. One of William Reid's guitars was selected by Allison and Hannon to carry the main tune, which was played by Hannon. Both themes were also reworked, with new lyrics, for inclusion on The Divine Comedy's 1996 album \"Casanova\": the final \"Father Ted\" theme became \"Songs of Love\", while Hannon's rejected theme became \"A Woman of the World\".\nIn 2010, Linehan discussed the dramatic effect this choice had on the tone of the series: \"'Woman of the World' was kind of like a jaunty, plinky-plonky song, and we wanted that song. He [Hannon] gave us two choices: he gave us that, and 'Songs of Love', and we wanted the plinky-plonky song because our idea was we were making fun of sitcoms. We were saying, you know, we don't like sitcoms. This is a parody of sitcoms. This is a kind of satire on sitcoms. And I remember Geoffrey [Perkins] looking really glum and sad about this, you know? And then he said, 'Why do you want to make fun of your characters?' He said, 'People will love these characters.' And that was just a real revelation for me, and after that, whatever he said went, as far as I was concerned.\"\nThe Divine Comedy also contributed most of the show's original music, including the songs \"Big Men in Frocks\" (for the episode \"Rock-a-Hula Ted\"), \"My Lovely Horse\" and \"The Miracle is Mine\" (for \"A Song for Europe\"), and \"My Lovely Mayo Mammy\" (for \"Night of the Nearly Dead\"). Neil Hannon also provided Ted and Dougal's vocals in the dream sequence version of \"My Lovely Horse\", which was produced by Allison and Hannon, and later appeared as a B-side on the band's single \"Gin Soaked Boy\".\nLocation.\nLocation work for \"Father Ted\" was done mostly in County Clare, including locations at Corofin, Ennis, Kilfenora, Ennistymon, and Kilnaboy. The Parochial House is McCormack's at Glenquin, on the Boston road from Kilnaboy. The cinema featured in \"The Passion of St Tibulus\" was the Ormonde Cinema, Greystones, County Wicklow and \"The Field\", the location for Funland in \"'Good Luck, Father Ted'\", is in Portrane, North County Dublin. The 'Very Dark Caves' featured in \"The Mainland\" were the Aillwee caves in the Burren, County Clare.\nSome exterior shots for the episode \"And God Created Woman\" were filmed in D\u00fan Laoghaire, South County Dublin. The opening sequence (including shots of the \"Plassy\" shipwreck) were filmed over Inisheer \u2014 the smallest of the Aran Islands. The interior scenes were recorded at the London Studios in front of a live studio audience.\nComedy style.\nThe series is set in a humorously surreal world in which Ted is the only fully rounded normal character among \"caricatures\", according to Graham Linehan: \"exaggerated-over-friendly, over-quiet, over-stupid, over-dull [...] they really only got one thing, they've got one job.\"\nEmbarrassment plays a role in many storylines, in a similar fashion to \"Fawlty Towers\". Linehan says, \"if Ted is in a situation that is slightly embarrassing we get him out of it [...] by having him lying or cheating, basically digging a massive hole for himself\". Arthur Mathews has described \"Seinfeld\" as a major influence on the comedy of \"Father Ted\", with himself and Linehan being \"big fans\" of the show. \"Father Ted\" also contains references to pop culture, and some film parodies, such as the episode \"Speed 3\".\nRegarding the series's religious content, Linehan says \"Ted doesn't have an anti-religious view of life, but a non-religious view. It's a job to him. He doesn't care about religion.\" While writing, he says the show's creators imagined Ted and Dougal as \"just two people who happen to be [priests]\".\nReception.\n\"Father Ted\" was met with critical acclaim and is one of the most popular sitcoms in Irish TV history. The Irish media frequently uses the series as a point of comparison in political stories.\nIn 1996 and 1999, the show won the BAFTA award for Best Comedy, while Morgan also won Best Comedy Performance. In 1995 the show won Best New TV Comedy at the British Comedy Awards, with O'Hanlon receiving Top TV Comedy Newcomer Award. At the 1996 British Comedy Awards the show won Top Channel 4 Sitcom Award, McLynn took the Top TV Comedy Actress award. In 1997 the show was given the Best Channel 4 Sitcom Award. It was also ranked at number 50 in the BFI's 2000 list of the 100 greatest British television programmes of the 20th century, the highest ranking Channel 4 production on the list. In 2004, it came 11th in the poll for Britain's Best Sitcom. In August 2012, Channel 4 viewers voted the series as the No 1 in \"C4's 30 Greatest Comedy Shows\".\nNotable fans of the show include director Steven Spielberg, musicians Liam Gallagher, Madonna, Cher and Moby, actors Jim Carrey and Steve Martin, comedian Ricky Gervais, and wrestler Sheamus. Maurice Gibb of the Bee Gees was buried with a copy of the DVD box set. Singer-songwriter Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor is a fan, and attended the recording of the Christmas special. Irish musician Bono also requested to appear in the series.\nIn January 2007, a dispute arose between Inisheer and Inishmore over which island can claim to be Craggy Island, and thereby host a three-day Friends of Ted Festival. The dispute was settled by a five-a-side football match that February. Inishmore won 2\u20130 allowing them to use the title of Craggy Island until February 2008, while Inisheer was given the title of Rugged Island. The Friends of Ted Festival, better known as Ted Fest, has been held annually as a \"Father Ted\" fan convention since 2007.\nIn August 2020 An Post released a set of commemorative postage stamps, each with a catchphrase from the series on a background of the parochial house's lurid wallpaper, in a booklet listing Mrs Doyle's guesses for the name of Father Todd Unctious.\nSeveral quotes from the series have entered the popular lexicon, such as \"These are \"small\", but the ones out there are \"far away\". Small. Far away.\", \"Down with this sort of thing\", and \"I hear you're a racist now, Father\".\nDerivatives.\nOn 1 January 2011, Channel 4 dedicated a night of programming to celebrate the show's 15th anniversary year. This included \"Father Ted: Unintelligent Design\", a documentary on the show's influences, and \"Small, Far Away: The World of Father Ted\", a documentary revisiting the show's history with the writers and many of the surviving cast (Pauline McLynn declined to take part).\nRoles reprised.\nIn 2001, Pauline McLynn reprised her role as Mrs Doyle in a run of advertisements for the UK's Inland Revenue, reminding people to get their taxes in on time with her catchphrase from the programme (\"Go on, go on, go on...\"). It was voted in an Adwatch poll of 1,000 people as the year's worst advertisement.\nLater in 2001, Ardal O'Hanlon returned to the role of Father Dougal for a series of PBS advertisements to coincide with \"Father Ted\"s American broadcast; these segments were included on later DVD releases as \"Fundraising with Father Dougal\".\nIn 2012, Frank Kelly made a brief appearance as Father Jack on an episode of \"The One Show\" with Graham Norton.\nIn 2014, guest star Ben Keaton returned to the role of Father Austin Purcell, performing a stand-up routine and hosting the pub quiz \"Arse Biscuits\" in-character. In 2015, he launched the spin-off web series \"Cook Like a Priest\".\nIn February 2016, Over The Top Wrestling marked the anniversary of Morgan's death with \"Ah Ted\", an event held in Dublin's Tivoli Variety Theatre. During the main-event tag-team match between The Lads From the Flats and The Kings of the North, Patrick McDonnell, Joe Rooney and Michael Redmond reprised their roles as Eoin McLove, Father Damo Lennon and Father Paul Stone respectively. McLove entered the ring first, withstanding one wrestler's attack on his crotch because he has \"no willy\", but was soon attacked by Father Damo, who brought the whistle he stole from Benson. Father Stone served as a special guest referee, performing a three-count so slow that one wrestler kicked out after two. In 2017, Rooney appeared as Father Damo in the video for Brave Giant's \"The Time I Met the Devil\", which follows him on the way to give Mass after a night of alcohol and sex.\nPotential remakes.\nSince the end of the series, several attempts to remake \"Father Ted\" have been reported, but none have yet materialised.\nIn July 2003, it was announced that the show would be remade for the American market. The remake would be scripted by Spike Feresten, who previously wrote for US sitcoms \"Seinfeld\" and \"The Simpsons\". Ferensten stated: \"I was raised Catholic and this show just felt right to me. The essence of the show is about men who are also priests and, as men, they have many foibles.\" Hat Trick founders Denise O'Donoghue and Jimmy Mulville were set to produce. The US production company was Pariah Productions, which previously adapted \"The Kumars at No. 42\" for an American audience.\nIn March 2004, Supanet Limited reported that an American remake was in development. This version would be set on a fictional island off the coast of New York. Steve Martin and Graham Norton would reportedly play Ted and Dougal. Martin had not been expected to take the role because of his stature, but agreed because he was a fan of the original series, and would reportedly be paid \u00a3500,000 per episode. Norton was cast based on his popularity with American audiences, and in reference to his appearance as Father Noel Furlong in the original series.\nIn November 2007, a separate American remake was announced. Rather than Craggy Island, this version would be set in an unfortunate fishing village in New England. American actor John Michael Higgins was cast as Ted, but expressed concerns about the show's religious themes: \"The English have a very robust history of being unkind about religion. We don't have that in our country, we're frightened of it. It's basically that you guys are doing an Irish joke also, we don't have that. So I'll be Father Ted, we'll see how it goes.\" Filming was scheduled to begin in January 2008.\nIn January 2015, Linehan said that there had been \"a few attempts\" by US broadcasters to remake the show, including one which would have been set in Boston \u2013 an idea Linehan considered \"ridiculous\".\nMusical.\nIn an interview with \"Radio Times\" in January 2015, Linehan revealed that he wanted to revive \"Father Ted\" as a musical stage production. He stated that he would never revive the television series itself, \"because of the risk you poison people's memories of the original\", but that the completely new format would make the project worthwhile. Linehan mentioned the possibility of a dance number with \"spinning cardinals\". He said that the musical would have to reference the Catholic child abuse scandals, stating, \"The jokes would have to have a little bit more edge, because you just can't ignore this stuff.\" Mathews was \"not as convinced\" of the musical idea, though Linehan still insisted it could work.\nIn December, Mathews said that he and Paul Woodfull were developing a Joshua Trio musical and a show focusing on a \"Father Michael Cleary-type character\", and that the \"Father Ted\" musical may follow. He expressed concerns that it would \"dilute the product\" or be seen as a \"cash-in\", but said that he believed there was an audience for the project.\nIn April 2017, Linehan said that the musical would draw inspiration from \"The Book of Mormon\", and would \"go for the jugular ... you get all the things people loved about it, all the innocence and all the sweetness, but introduce a harder edge\". Linehan also said that, being a special event, the musical would need to focus on a \"world-shaking\" story, possibly with Ted becoming Pope due to \"some weird succession thing\". In June, Linehan said that he hoped The Divine Comedy frontman Neil Hannon, who wrote the show's music, would return to compose the songs.\nIn June 2018, Linehan announced that \"Pope Ted: The Father Ted Musical\" was nearing completion, with a script by Linehan and Mathews and music by Hannon. Linehan said, \"It's the real final episode of \"Father Ted\". This is true and not one of my stupid jokes, I promise. Didn't want to do something until the right idea came along. This was the right idea. Arthur and I have been laughing our arses off while writing it. Just like the old days\"."}
{"id": "11314", "revid": "21806755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11314", "title": "Foster's Lager", "text": "Foster's Lager is an internationally-distributed brand of lager. It is owned by the international brewing group Asahi Group Holdings., and is brewed under licence in a number of countries, including its biggest market, the UK, where the European rights to the brand are owned by Heineken International.\nWhile Foster's is the largest-selling Australian beer brand in the world, it is not as popular and relatively rare compared with other beers in Australia, particularly when compared to other Carlton &amp; United Breweries beers such as Victoria Bitter and Carlton Draught.\nHistory.\nFoster's was created by two American brothers, William M. and Ralph R. Foster, who arrived in Melbourne from New York in 1886. The brothers began brewing Foster's Lager in November 1888. It was made available to the public from February 1889. The product was first exported in 1901, when bottles were sent to Australian combatants in the Boer War.\nIn 1907, the company merged with five other brewing companies to form Carlton &amp; United Breweries (CUB). Then only available in bottles, Foster's Lager was considered to be CUB's premium brand.\nIn 1958, steel cans were introduced.\nFoster's Lager was first imported into the UK in 1971. It was launched in the US in 1972.\nCommencing 1981, the brand was brewed under licence in the UK by Watney Mann and Truman Brewers. This was the first time that Fosters had been available on draught anywhere in the world; in Australia it had only been available first in bottles, then later in cans. The draught product was based on Carlton Lager, another Carlton United Brewers product, and it was first brewed in the UK at the pilot brewery at Truman's Brick Lane Brewery in mid 1981. In 1986, Courage obtained the rights to brew and distribute Foster's alongside Watney Mann and Truman Brewers. This was a result of a deal done following Courage's acquisition by Carlton United Breweries in 1990, which by that time had been re-named as Foster's Brewing Group. In 1990, Courage took over Watney Mann and Truman Brewers following the pubs for breweries swap with WMTB's parent company Grand Met.\nIn 2011, CUB and its product lines, including Foster's, were bought by the South African and British conglomerate SABMiller, which in turn was incorporated into the multinational (Belgian, Brazilian, and American) Anheuser-Busch InBev in 2016. In 2019, Anheuser-Busch InBev agreed to sell CUB including Fosters to Asahi Breweries. The deal is expected to completed in 2020.\nProduction.\nAdvertising from the early 20th century claimed Foster's Lager was adjuncted with cane sugar. A number of breweries advertised a sugar content, (e.g. Bulimba), as it implied a lighter less bitter brew than was commonly sold. (Rice malt and very light barley malts replaced sugar, which can be troublesome for brewers.) Continuing a \"tradition\" started in the early 20th century, the water used in the production is sourced from the nearby Yarra River which contributes to the beer's unique taste.\nThe Tim Foster's yeast in use today was brought to Carlton in 1923 from Professor Jorgensen in Denmark.\nThe lager is hopped with selected oil extracts of Super Pride of Ringwood hops, which like any modern beer, is added after fermentation to minimise losses to the yeast sediment. The hop is sourced from the only two farms in Australia that grow it.\nThe product is 4% ABV in Europe, Australia and India, and 5% in the US.\nThe European rights to the beer are owned by Heineken International, who brews and distributes a 4% ABV Foster's in most European countries. In the United States and India, rights to the brand are owned by SABMiller. In Canada and Brazil, Foster's is brewed by Molson Canada and Brasil Kirin under licence from Foster's Brewing International.\nIn the UK, Foster's is produced by Heineken at the Royal Brewery in Manchester.\nProduction of the Australian regular brand recommenced in 2014, but it was only briefly promoted. It had been in continuous production from November 1888 to about 2002, making it the longest-lived beer label in Australia. Once a \"premium\" brand, Foster's Lager has been bypassed by the Foster's Group's favoured premium brands of Carlton Crown Lager and Stella Artois.\nIn Australia until the end of the 1970s, Foster's Lager was a reasonably popular bottled and canned beer with a somewhat premium image. Then in the early 1980s there were major changes in the Australian brewing industry, including the merger of Castlemaine (Brisbane), Swan (Perth) and Toohey's (Sydney) into a national brewing group, as a result of acquisitions by Perth entrepreneur Alan Bond.\nFaced with inroads into its non-Victorian markets, Carlton and United Beverages (CUB) reviewed its product range and attempted to re-position some of its brands. Foster's Draught was introduced, served on tap alongside established draught brands such as Castlemaine XXXX and Toohey's Draught. Despite some initial success, bolstered by heavy advertising, the brand did not prove to be popular and was eventually withdrawn from sale.\nThe Foster's Group has tended to promote the brands of Carlton Draught (mainstream market) and Victoria Bitter (working class male market).\nThe CUB Yatala Road Brewery south of Brisbane, the site of the former Power's Brewery, brews all CUB mainstream and contract beers that are sold outside of Victoria. The Yatala Brewery is the largest in the Southern Hemisphere. CUB's original Abbotsford Brewery now only supplies Victoria and South Australia, although the CUB headquarters remains there.\nIn late 2014 Foster's enjoyed some renewed success in the Australian market, due to returning to wide-release sale in Australian liquor stores with some renewed nostalgic brand recognition. Foster's lager was marketed as \"Foster's Classic\" and sold in 375ml cans with 4.0% ABV.\nIn November 2020, CUB announced that it would \"relaunch\" the brand in Australia, boosting local production by 300% and price it competitively against rival brands.\nGlobal market.\nIn April 2006, Scottish &amp; Newcastle plc announced that it had agreed to acquire the Foster's brand in Europe (including Turkey), the Russian Federation and other countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States for approximately \u00a3309 million. In August 2006, SABMiller, now owned by AB InBev, announced that it had bought back rights to the Foster's brand in India for a reported $120m from private investors.\nAn odd case emerged in 2015 when a New York consumer of Foster's Lager sued the brewer after - he claimed - discovering it was not brewed in Australia. He proposed a class action on the grounds of deceptive marketing. The suit cited advertising slogans such as 'Foster's Australian for Beer' and 'How to Speak Australian' were intended to trick consumers into believing the beer is made in Australia - which in turn meant the beer could be sold at a higher, premium price.\nA number of companies own marketing rights to Foster's including Heineken International in Europe and CIS, MillerCoors in the U.S., Labatt in Canada and Brasil Kirin in Brazil.\nVariants.\nScottish &amp; Newcastle launched Foster's Twist, a beer with a hint of citrus that is marketed as a refreshing alternative to other heavier beers and Premium Packaged Spirits such as Smirnoff Ice. Foster's Twist is 4.5% abv. It has since been withdrawn from the market.\nThere also exists Foster's Super Chilled, which is served at a colder temperature and is available in pubs and bars.\nIn 2008, Foster's was introduced with a widget called a \"scuba\" placed into the can to ensure good mixing. This variant is only currently available in the UK.\nIn the UK, customers are also able to purchase a keg of Foster's for private parties, collecting and returning the keg at a participating store or public house.\nAlso, there is Fosters Gold which has a slightly higher alcohol percentage of 4.5% sold only in bottles.\nMarketing.\nFrom 1964, the brand was promoted in the UK by comedian Barry Humphries and his \"Private Eye\" character Barry McKenzie, a bumbling Foster's swilling Australian expatriate.\nFoster's Lager used the slogan \"The Amber Nectar\" in Australia and the UK, and \"Australian for Beer\", elsewhere overseas. The overseas advertising of the product often focuses on the Australian connotations of the beer, e.g. with reference to stereotypical Australian imagery such as kangaroos, exaggerated accents, and cork hats. This was true of a campaign in the 1980s fronted by the Australian comedian Paul Hogan.\nThe 2009 campaign for Foster's contains two 40-second adverts, \"Backpacker\" and \"Deep Sea\"; both end with the slogan, \"Foster's \u2013 get some Australian in you.\"\nThe Foster's Lager brand was used as an advertising sponsorship deal with Norwich City F.C. from 1986 to 1989 (a period which included two top five finishes and a run to the FA Cup semi-finals). At its commencement, the sponsorship by Foster's was the most lucrative sponsorship ever given to an English football club.\nThe brand sponsored Formula One events regularly from 1986 to 2006. During this period it was the title sponsor for the Australian GP (1986\u20131993 and 2002\u20132006), the British GP (1990\u20131993 and 2000\u20132006) and the San Marino GP (2003\u20132006). It also was the prime sponsor and trackside sponsor of many other Grands Prix during this time. The brand was also used in a sponsorship deal with the A1 Team Australia from 2005 to 2007.\nThe UK division of the Foster's brand has focused on cultivating comedy-centric advertising and sponsorship arrangements and on 9 November 2011 they launched a trailer for their sponsored, online-only version of the hit 90s' television show \"The Fast Show\". The six weekly episodes started on 10 November and featured the original cast (with the exception of Mark Williams) and many of the characters from the previous series.\nFrom 2010 to 2015 Foster's adverts featured \"Good call\", in which numerous Britons phone up Australians Brad and Dan for general advice. The campaign was revived in 2019."}
{"id": "11315", "revid": "31694221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11315", "title": "Friends", "text": "Friends is an American television sitcom, created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman, which aired on NBC from September 22, 1994, to May 6, 2004, lasting ten seasons. With an ensemble cast starring Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer, the show revolves around six friends in their 20s and 30s who live in Manhattan, New York City. The series was produced by Bright/Kauffman/Crane Productions, in association with Warner Bros. Television. The original executive producers were Kevin S. Bright, Kauffman, and Crane.\nKauffman and Crane began developing \"Friends\" under the title \"Insomnia Cafe\" between November and December 1993. They presented the idea to Bright, and together they pitched a seven-page treatment of the show to NBC. After several script rewrites and changes, including title changes to \"Six of One\" and \"Friends Like Us\", the series was finally named \"Friends\".\nFilming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. All ten seasons of \"Friends\" ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings; it ultimately reached the number-one spot in its eighth season. The series finale aired on May 6, 2004, and was watched by around 52.5\u00a0million American viewers, making it the fifth most-watched series finale in television history, and the most-watched television episode of the 2000s.\n\"Friends\" received acclaim throughout its run, becoming one of the most popular television shows of all time. The series was nominated for 62 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning the Outstanding Comedy Series award in 2002 for its eighth season. The show ranked no. 21 on \"TV Guide\"s 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time, and no. 7 on \"Empire\" magazine's The 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. In 1997, the episode \"The One with the Prom Video\" was ranked 100 on \"TV Guide\"s 100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time. In 2013, \"Friends\" ranked no. 24 on the Writers Guild of America's 101 Best Written TV Series of All Time, and no. 28 on \"TV Guide\"s 60 Best TV Series of All Time.\nPremise.\nRachel Green, a sheltered but friendly woman, flees her wedding day and wealthy yet unfulfilling life and finds childhood friend Monica Geller, a tightly wound but caring chef. After Rachel becomes a waitress at West Village coffee house Central Perk, she moves into Monica's apartment above Central Perk and joins Monica's group of single friends in their mid-20s: previous roommate Phoebe Buffay, an eccentric, weird masseuse; neighbor Joey Tribbiani, a dim-witted yet loyal struggling actor and womanizer; Joey's roommate Chandler Bing, a sarcastic, self-deprecating IT manager; and Monica's older brother and Chandler's college roommate Ross Geller, a sweet-natured but insecure paleontologist.\nEpisodes depict the friends' comedic and romantic adventures and career issues, such as Joey auditioning for roles or Rachel seeking jobs in the fashion industry. The six characters each have many dates and serious relationships, such as Monica with Richard Burke and Ross with Emily Waltham. Ross and Rachel's intermittent relationship is the most often-recurring storyline; during the ten seasons of the show, they repeatedly date and break up. Over the course of the series, Ross briefly marries Emily, Ross and Rachel have a child together after a one-night stand, Chandler and Monica date and marry each other, and Phoebe marries Mike Hannigan. Other frequently recurring characters include Ross and Monica's parents Jack and Judy Geller from Long Island; Ross's ex-wife Carol Willick, their son Ben Geller, and Carol's lesbian partner Susan Bunch; Central Perk barista Gunther; Chandler's extremely annoying and obnoxious but good-natured ex-girlfriend Janice Goralnik; and Phoebe's evil twin sister Ursula.\nCast and characters.\nJames Michael Tyler appears as Gunther, a barista at Central Perk in every season of the show, but is only ever credited as a guest star. Gunther has a, mostly, secret profound love for Rachel, throughout the entire series. He at one point, becomes the manager of the coffee house. It is revealed that Gunther speaks Dutch in addition to English, as well as being a former soap opera actor.\nIn their original contracts for the first season, cast members were paid $22,500 per episode. The cast members received different salaries in the second season, beginning from the $20,000 range to $40,000 per episode. Before their salary negotiations for the third season, the cast decided to enter collective negotiations, despite Warner Bros.' preference for individual deals. The actors were given the salary of the least paid cast member. The stars were paid $75,000 per episode in season three, $85,000 in season four, $100,000 in season five, $125,000 in season six, $750,000 in seasons seven and eight, and $1\u00a0million in seasons nine and ten, making Aniston, Cox, and Kudrow the highest-paid TV actresses of all time. The cast also received syndication royalties beginning in 2000 after renegotiations. At the time, that financial benefit of a piece of the show's lucrative back-end profits had only been given out to stars who had ownership rights in a show, like Jerry Seinfeld and Bill Cosby.\nSeries creator David Crane wanted all six actors to be equally prominent, and the series was lauded as being \"the first true 'ensemble' show.\" The cast members made efforts to keep the ensemble format and not allow one member to dominate; they entered themselves in the same acting categories for awards, opted for collective salary negotiations, and asked to appear together on magazine cover photos in the first season. The cast members also became best friends off-screen, so much so that recurring guest star Tom Selleck reported that he sometimes felt left out.\nThe cast remained good friends after the series run, most notably Cox and Aniston, with Aniston being godmother to Cox and David Arquette's daughter, Coco. In the official farewell commemorative book \"Friends 'Til the End\", each separately acknowledged in interviews that the cast had become their family.\nEpisodes.\nSeason 1.\nThe first season introduces the six main characters who live in New York City: Rachel Green, a waitress; professional chef Monica Geller; her paleontologist brother, Ross Geller; free-spirited masseuse Phoebe Buffay; struggling actor Joey Tribbiani, and Ross's college friend, Chandler Bing, whose precise occupation at a corporation is unknown. Rachel arrives at Central Perk, wearing her wedding dress, after leaving her fianc\u00e9, Barry, an orthodontist, at the altar. She moves into her high school friend Monica's apartment, and gets a waitress job at Central Perk. Ross, who has had a crush on Rachel since high school, often attempts to declare his feelings for her. However, many obstacles stand in his way, including his insecurities, Rachel dating an Italian neighbour named Paolo, and the fact that he is expecting a baby with his lesbian ex-wife, Carol, who gives birth to Ben later in the season. Joey never has a steady girlfriend and constantly sleeps with a variety of women. Phoebe is rather quirky and eccentric, mostly due to her mother's suicide when Phoebe was a child and having lived on the streets for a time. However, the gang loves her regardless. Chandler breaks up with his girlfriend, Janice (Maggie Wheeler), only to find himself reconnecting with her throughout the series. Near the end of the season, while Ross is at a paleontology dig in China, Chandler accidentally lets slip that Ross loves Rachel, who then realizes that she also cares for him. The season ends with Rachel waiting at the airport for Ross, who is returning from China.\nSeason 2.\nRachel greets Ross at the airport only to discover that he has returned with Julie (Lauren Tom), someone he knew from graduate school. Rachel's attempts to tell Ross that she loves him initially mirror his failed attempts in the first season. After he breaks up with Julie for Rachel, friction between them develops when Rachel discovers Ross's list of the cons of dating her. They eventually begin a relationship after Rachel sees an old home video from her and Monica's prom night and realizes Ross was going to stand in for her prom date who nearly stood her up. Monica is promoted to head chef at the Iridium restaurant, then gets fired for accepting gifts from a supplier, which is against company policy. Needing money, she is forced to take an embarrassing job as a waitress at a 1950s-style diner. She also begins dating Richard Burke (Tom Selleck), a recently divorced family friend who is 21 years her senior. They eventually break up when Monica realizes that Richard, already a father, does not want more children. Joey is cast in a fictional version of the soap opera, \"Days of Our Lives\" as neurosurgeon Dr. Drake Ramoray. He moves out of his and Chandler's apartment, forcing Chandler to get a new roommate, Eddie (Adam Goldberg). However, Eddie is annoying and somewhat deranged. When Joey claims in a soap opera magazine interview that he writes many of his own lines, offending the show's writer, his character is killed off. No longer able to afford his expensive new apartment, Joey moves back in with Chandler, kicking Eddie out in the process. In the season finale, Chandler talks to an anonymous woman in an online chat room. When they agree to meet in person, the woman turns out to be Janice.\nSeason 3.\nSeason 3 takes on a significantly more serialized format. Chandler and Janice date for several episodes until Joey catches Janice kissing her soon-to-be ex-husband. Not wanting to destroy her family, Chandler urges Janice to go back to her husband, then becomes depressed over the breakup for several episodes. Rachel quits her job at Central Perk and begins working at Bloomingdale's, an upscale department store chain. Ross soon becomes jealous of her colleague Mark. Ross is frustrated by Rachel's long work hours. She is tired of his constant jealousy and insecurity and decides they need a relationship break. Ross, hurt and somewhat drunk, immediately sleeps with Chloe, \"the hot girl from the Xerox place,\" causing Rachel to break up with him fully. Although Phoebe initially believes she has no family except her twin sister Ursula (Lisa Kudrow), she learns she has a half-brother, Frank Jr. (Giovanni Ribisi) and discovers her birth mother, Phoebe Abbott (Teri Garr) over the course of the season. Joey falls in love with his acting partner Kate (Dina Meyer), but is jealous of her dating the director of their play. They begin a brief relationship that ends when she takes an acting job in Los Angeles. Monica dates millionaire Pete Becker (Jon Favreau), despite her initially not being attracted to him. However, she breaks up with Pete after he is seriously hurt trying to become the Ultimate Fighting Champion and refuses to quit. Phoebe sets Ross up on a date with her friend, Bonnie (Christine Taylor), inciting Rachel's jealousy. She tries sabotaging the relationship by coercing Bonnie to shave her head bald, and eventually admits to Ross that she still has feelings for him. The season closes with Ross having to choose between Rachel and Bonnie.\nSeason 4.\nIn the season 4 premiere, after Ross breaks up with Bonnie, he and Rachel briefly reconcile after Ross pretends to read a long letter that Rachel wrote for him. However, Ross continues to insist that the two were on a break when he slept with Chloe, so they break up again. Joey dates Kathy (Paget Brewster), a girl that Chandler has a crush on. Kathy and Chandler later kiss, which causes drama between Chandler and Joey. Joey only forgives Chandler and allows him to date Kathy after Chandler spends Thanksgiving in a box as punishment. Chandler's relationship with Kathy ends after he discovers that she cheated on him due to an argument. Phoebe loses her job as a masseuse after making out with one of her clients and she accompanies Monica, who has become a caterer for hire. They soon start a catering business together but Monica, after negatively reviewing a restaurant, Allesandro's, is offered the position of head chef. Despite initially being pressured by the wrath of her co-workers, Monica eventually asserts her dominance in the kitchen. Phoebe becomes a surrogate mother for her brother and his wife, Alice (Debra Jo Rupp). Monica and Rachel are forced to switch apartments with Joey and Chandler after losing a bet during a quiz game, but manage to switch back by bribing them with Knicks season tickets and a one-minute kiss (off-screen) between each other. After her boss dies, Rachel is demoted to personal shopping and meets and later dates a customer named Joshua (Tate Donovan). Ross begins dating an English woman named Emily (Helen Baxendale), and they quickly get engaged. Rachel struggles to cope and hastily suggests to Joshua that they marry, after which he rejects her. In the season finale, the group, apart from Phoebe and Rachel, travel to Ross and Emily's wedding in London. Chandler and Monica sleep together, and Rachel, realizing that she is still in love with Ross, rushes to London to stop Ross and Emily's wedding, but changes her mind when she sees them happy together. While saying his vows, Ross says Rachel's name at the altar, shocking his bride and the guests.\nSeason 5.\nRoss and Emily marry, but an angry and humiliated Emily flees the reception. Rachel soon admits her love for Ross, but realizing how ridiculous this is, advises him to work on his marriage to Emily. She develops a crush on her neighbour Danny and they date briefly, until she realizes that he is too close with his sister. Monica and Chandler try to keep their new relationship a secret from their friends. Phoebe gives birth to triplets in the show's 100th\u00a0episode. She gives birth to a boy, Frank Jr. Jr., and two girls, Leslie and Chandler. After weeks of trying to contact her, Emily agrees to reconcile with Ross and move to New York if he breaks off all communication with Rachel. Ross agrees, but later attends a dinner with all his friends, Rachel included. Emily phones Ross, discovers Rachel is there, realizes she does not trust him and ends their marriage. Ross takes out his anger at work, resulting in him being indefinitely suspended from the museum, and he moves in with Chandler and Joey until eventually getting a new apartment across the street from them. Rachel gets a new job at Ralph Lauren. Phoebe begins a relationship with a police officer, Gary (Michael Rapaport), after finding his badge and using it as her own. Monica and Chandler go public with their relationship, to the surprise and delight of their friends. They decide to get married on a trip to Las Vegas, but change their plans after witnessing Ross and Rachel drunkenly stumbling out of the wedding chapel.\nSeason 6.\nIn the season 6 premiere, Ross and Rachel's marriage turns out to be a drunken mistake that neither remembers until the other friends mention it. Ross promises Rachel he will get them an annulment, then secretly does nothing because he cannot face having three failed marriages. By the time Rachel discovers they are still married, an annulment is impossible due to their history; they are forced to get a divorce. After ignoring the numerous signs that they should get married, Monica and Chandler decide to live together, forcing Rachel to move in with Phoebe. Joey gets a new roommate, Janine (Elle Macpherson). They develop feelings for each other and date briefly until Janine criticizes Monica and Chandler, ending the relationship. After Janine moves out, Joey struggles with paying his bills so he takes a job at Central Perk. He soon lands a role on a cable TV series called \"Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E.\", starring alongside a crime-fighting robot. Ross gets a teaching job at New York University. He dates Elizabeth (Alexandra Holden), a student, despite it being against university policy. Elizabeth's father, Paul (Bruce Willis), disapproves of Ross but falls for Rachel, and they start dating. Both relationships soon end: Elizabeth is too immature for Ross, and previously reserved Paul opens up emotionally and is more than Rachel can handle. Phoebe and Rachel's apartment catches fire, and Rachel moves in with Joey, while Phoebe stays with Chandler and Monica, though they later switch. While at a museum that has a two-year wait for weddings, Monica puts her name on the reservation list as a joke. When Chandler intercepts the museum's phone call about a cancellation, he panics; however, Chandler has been planning to propose while pretending he may never want to marry. While dining at a fancy restaurant, Chandler's planned proposal is subverted by Monica's ex-boyfriend Richard Burke, who unexpectedly shows up. Richard later tells Monica he wants to marry her and have children. Monica becomes upset at Chandler, believing his ruse about not wanting to marry. Chandler believes Monica has left him until he comes home to find their apartment decorated with candles and her waiting to propose to him. When she becomes too emotional to continue, Chandler proposes and she accepts.\nSeason 7.\nThe seventh season mainly follows Monica and Chandler as they plan their wedding amid various problems. Joey's television series, \"Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E\" is canceled, but he is offered his old role on \"Days of Our Lives\"; the show is retconned with the revelation that Dr. Drake Ramoray has been in a four-year coma and is revived with a brain transplant from another character. Phoebe's repaired apartment now has one large bedroom instead of the original two, so Rachel permanently stays at Joey's. Rachel is promoted at Ralph Lauren and impulsively hires a young assistant, Tag Jones (Eddie Cahill), based on his looks, passing over a more qualified woman. Tag discovers her feelings about him at Thanksgiving dinner, and they begin dating, hiding it from co-workers. However, on her 30th birthday, Rachel ends their relationship, realizing Tag is too young and immature, particularly if she intends to follow her marriage schedule. Hours before Monica and Chandler's wedding ceremony, Chandler panics and goes into hiding just as Phoebe and Rachel find a positive pregnancy test in Monica and Chandler's bathroom. They assume Monica is pregnant. Ross and Phoebe find Chandler and convince him to return for the ceremony, though he briefly bolts again after overhearing Phoebe and Rachel discussing the pregnancy test. He quickly returns, embracing the idea of fatherhood. After the ceremony, Monica denies she is pregnant; unbeknown to everyone, the positive pregnancy test is Rachel's.\nSeason 8.\nSeason 8 begins at Monica and Chandler's wedding reception. Phoebe and Monica discover Rachel's pregnancy and persuade her to take another test to confirm it. Phoebe initially claims the test is negative, badly disappointing Rachel, then reveals it is positive, saying Rachel now knows how she really feels about having a baby. Ross is eventually revealed to be the father, and the season revolves around Rachel's pregnancy. Rachel and Ross agree to be co-parents without resuming their romantic relationship; Ross begins dating Mona (Bonnie Somerville), who is Monica's co-worker from Allesandro's. Joey takes Rachel out to quell her fears about motherhood, and realizes he has romantic feelings for her. While suppressing his feelings, he encourages Rachel to stay at Ross's apartment so he can be involved in the pregnancy. The arrangement is too much for Mona, and she breaks up with Ross. Joey tells Ross about his feelings for Rachel. Ross initially is angry, then gives his blessing. Joey tells Rachel that he loves her, but she realizes she does not feel the same way, and they remain friends. When Rachel goes into labor, Ross's mother gives him a family heirloom ring and encourages him to propose to Rachel. Ross hesitates, and puts the ring in his jacket, which he later leaves in Rachel's room. After Monica jokes about having kids, she and Chandler decide to have a baby, starting while they are still at the hospital. After a prolonged labor, during which numerous other expectant mothers, including Janice, are taken to the delivery room, Rachel gives birth to baby Emma. She is left saddened and afraid after Janice later says that Ross may not always be there for her and the baby. When Joey comforts Rachel, the ring falls from Ross's jacket to the floor. Joey kneels to pick it up, and Rachel, believing he is proposing, impulsively says yes. Meanwhile, Ross intends to ask Rachel if she wants to resume their relationship.\nSeason 9.\nSeason nine begins with Ross and Rachel cohabitating with their daughter Emma, after Joey and Rachel clear up the proposal misunderstanding. Monica and Chandler run into obstacles as they try for a baby: Chandler unknowingly agrees to a work transfer to Tulsa just as Monica is offered a head chef job at a new restaurant, Javu, resulting in Chandler commuting back and forth. After being apart from Monica during Christmas, Chandler quits to pursue a new career in advertising, starting as an unpaid intern at an ad agency, and eventually being hired as a junior copywriter. Finally, Monica and Chandler discover they are physically incompatible to conceive and after considering multiple options, decide to adopt. Phoebe begins dating Mike Hannigan (Paul Rudd) for most of the season until Mike says that he never wants to marry again. Phoebe dates her ex-boyfriend from season 1, David (Hank Azaria) who plans on proposing to her, but Mike proposes first. Phoebe rejects both proposals but gets back together with Mike, only needing the reassurance that they have a future together. Rachel, believing that her co-worker Gavin (Dermot Mulroney) is trying to steal her job while she is on maternity leave, returns to Ralph Lauren early. She discovers at her birthday party that Gavin has feelings for her. They kiss but do not pursue a relationship due to her history with Ross. Meanwhile, Ross, having seen the kiss, retaliates by dating other women. After realizing that her and Ross's living situation is too weird, Rachel and Emma move in with Joey. Rachel develops a crush on him, only to be disheartened when he starts dating Charlie (Aisha Tyler), a new paleontology professor who Ross is attracted to. In the finale, the group travels to Barbados for Ross's keynote speech at a conference. Joey and Charlie break up upon realizing they have nothing in common. Joey then learns about Rachel's feelings for him, but says they cannot pursue this because of Ross. However, upon seeing Ross and Charlie kiss each other, he goes to Rachel's hotel room, and the finale ends with them kissing.\nSeason 10.\nThe tenth season brings several long-running story lines to a close. Joey and Rachel try to contend with Ross's feelings about their relationship, and after disastrous attempts to consummate, decide it is best they remain friends. Charlie breaks up with Ross to get back together with her ex-boyfriend. Mid-season, Joey officiates Phoebe and Mike's wedding outside the Central Perk coffee house after a snow storm paralyzes the city, preventing them and guests getting to the wedding venue. Monica and Chandler are chosen by a pregnant woman named Erica (Anna Faris) to adopt her baby. Following this, Monica and Chandler prepare to move to a house in the suburbs to raise their family, saddening everyone, particularly Joey, who is coping with all the changes in his life. In the series finale, Erica gives birth to fraternal twins, much to Monica and Chandler's surprise. Rachel is fired from Ralph Lauren after her boss overhears her interviewing for a job at Gucci. She encounters her former Bloomingdale co-worker Mark, who offers her a new job at Louis Vuitton in Paris. Ross, believing Rachel wants to stay, tries bribing Mr. Zelner to rehire her until he realizes Rachel wants to go to Paris. When Rachel says a tearful personal goodbye to everyone except Ross at her going away party, a hurt and angry Ross confronts Rachel, and they end up sleeping together. Rachel leaves, and Ross \u2013 realizing how much he loves Rachel \u2013 chases her to the airport. When he reaches her, Rachel says she has to go to Paris. Before the plane takes off, Rachel calls Ross's home phone and leaves a voice mail, apologizing for the way it ended. While speaking, she realizes that she loves him too, and gets off the plane at the last minute. The series ends with all the friends, plus Monica and Chandler's new babies, leaving the empty apartment together for a final cup of coffee at Central Perk. The show ends first with a shot of everyone's keys to Monica and Chandler's apartment left on the counter top, and then pans to a shot of the apartment's purple door.\nProduction.\nConception.\nDavid Crane and Marta Kauffman began developing three new television pilots that would premiere in 1994 after their sitcom \"Family Album\" was cancelled by CBS in 1993. Kauffman and Crane decided to pitch the series about \"six people in their 20s making their way in Manhattan\" to NBC since they thought it would fit best there. Crane and Kauffman presented the idea to their production partner Kevin Bright, who had served as executive producer on their HBO series \"Dream On\". The idea for the series was conceived when Crane and Kauffman began thinking about the time when they had finished college and started living by themselves in New York; Kauffman believed they were looking at a time when the future was \"more of a question mark.\" They found the concept to be interesting, as they believed \"everybody knows that feeling\", and because it was also how they felt about their own lives at the time. The team titled the series \"Insomnia Cafe\" and pitched the idea as a seven-page treatment to NBC in December 1993.\nAt the same time, Warren Littlefield, the then-president of NBC Entertainment, was seeking a comedy involving young people living together and sharing expenses. Littlefield wanted the group to share memorable periods of their lives with friends, who had become \"new, surrogate family members.\" However, Littlefield found difficulty in bringing the concept to life and found the scripts developed by NBC to be terrible. When Kauffman, Crane and Bright pitched \"Insomnia Cafe\", Littlefield was impressed that they knew who their characters were. NBC bought the idea as a put pilot, meaning they risked financial penalties if the pilot was not filmed. Kauffman and Crane took three days to write the pilot script for a show they titled \"Friends Like Us.\" Littlefield wanted the series to \"represent Generation X and explore a new kind of tribal bonding\", but the rest disagreed. Crane argued that it was not a series for one generation, and wanted to produce a series that everyone would enjoy watching. NBC liked the script and ordered the series. They changed the title to \"Six of One\", mainly because they felt \"Friends Like Us\" was too similar to the ABC sitcom \"These Friends of Mine\".\nCasting.\nOnce it became apparent that the series was a favored project at NBC, Littlefield reported that he was getting calls from every agent in town, wanting their client to be a part of the series. Auditions for the lead roles took place in New York and Los Angeles. The casting director shortlisted 1,000\u00a0actors who had applied for each role down to 75. Those who received a callback read in front of Crane, Kauffman and Bright. At the end of March, the number of potential actors had been reduced to three or four for each part, and these actors were asked to read for Les Moonves, then-president of Warner Bros. Television.\nHaving worked with David Schwimmer in the past, the series creators wrote the character of Ross with him in mind, and he was the first actor cast. Cox wanted to play the role of Monica because she liked the \"strong\" character, but the producers had her in mind to play Rachel because of her \"cheery, upbeat energy\", which was not how they envisioned Monica; after Cox's audition, though, Kauffman agreed with Cox, and she got the role. When Matt LeBlanc auditioned for Joey, he put a \"different spin\" on the character. He played Joey more simple-minded than intended and gave the character heart. Although Crane and Kauffman did not want LeBlanc for the role at the time, they were told by the network to cast him. Jennifer Aniston, Matthew Perry and Lisa Kudrow were cast based on their auditions.\nMore changes occurred to the series's storylines during the casting process. The writers found that they had to adjust the characters they had written to suit the actors, and the discovery process of the characters occurred throughout the first season. Kauffman acknowledged that Joey's character became \"this whole new being\", and that \"it wasn't until we did the first Thanksgiving episode that we realized how much fun Monica's neuroses are.\"\nWriting.\nIn the weeks after NBC's pick up of \"Friends\", Crane, Kauffman and Bright reviewed sent-in scripts that writers had originally prepared for other series, mainly unproduced \"Seinfeld\" episodes. Kauffman and Crane hired a team of seven young writers because \"When you're 40, you can't do it anymore. The networks and studios are looking for young people coming in out of college.\" The creators felt that using six equal characters, rather than emphasizing one or two, would allow for \"myriad storylines and give the show legs.\" The majority of the storyline ideas came from the writers, although the actors added ideas. Although the writers originally planned the big love story to be between Joey and Monica, the idea of a romantic interest between Ross and Rachel emerged during the period when Kauffman and Crane wrote the pilot script.\nDuring the production of the pilot, NBC requested that the script be changed to feature one dominant storyline and several minor ones, but the writers refused, wanting to keep three storylines of equal weight. NBC also wanted the writers to include an older character to balance out the young ones. Crane and Kauffman were forced to comply and wrote a draft of an early episode that featured \"Pat the Cop.\" who would be used to provide advice to the other characters. Crane found the storyline to be terrible, and Kauffman joked, \"You know the book, \"Pat the Bunny\"? We had Pat the Cop.\" NBC eventually relented and dropped the idea.\nEach summer, the producers would outline the storylines for the subsequent season. Before an episode went into production, Kauffman and Crane would revise the script written by another writer, mainly if something concerning either the series or a character felt foreign. The hardest episodes to write were always \"the first one and the last one of each season.\" Unlike other storylines, the idea for a relationship between Joey and Rachel was decided on halfway through the eighth season. The creators did not want Ross and Rachel to get back together so soon, and while looking for a romantic impediment, a writer suggested Joey's romantic interest in Rachel. The storyline was incorporated into the season; however, when the actors feared that the storyline would make their characters unlikable, the storyline was wrapped up, until it again resurfaced in the season's finale. For the ninth season, the writers were unsure about the amount of storyline to give to Rachel's baby, as they wanted the show neither to revolve around a baby nor pretend there to be none. Crane said that it took them a while to accept the idea of a tenth season, which they decided to do because they had enough stories left to tell to justify the season. Kauffman and Crane would not have signed on for an eleventh season, even if all the cast members had wanted to continue.\nThe episode title format\u2014\"The One ...\"\u2014was created when the producers realized that the episode titles would not be featured in the opening credits, and therefore would be unknown to most of the audience. Episode titles officially begin with \"The One ...\" except the title of the pilot episode and the series finale \"The Last One.\" The season 5 episode \"The One Hundredth\" has the alternative title of \"The One With The Triplet\".\nFilming.\nThe first season was shot on Stage 5 at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. NBC executives had worried that the coffee house setting was too hip and asked for the series to be set in a diner, but eventually consented to the coffee house concept. The opening title sequence was filmed in a fountain at the Warner Bros. Ranch at 4:00\u00a0am, while it was particularly cold for a Burbank morning. At the beginning of the second season, production moved to the larger Stage\u00a024, which was renamed \"The Friends Stage\" after the series finale. Filming for the series began during the summer of 1994 in front of a live audience, who were given a summary of the series to familiarize themselves with the six main characters; a hired comedian entertained the studio audience between takes. Each 22-minute episode took six hours to film\u2014twice the length of most sitcom tapings\u2014mainly due to the several retakes and rewrites of the script.\nAlthough the producers always wanted to find the right stories to take advantage of being on location, \"Friends\" was never shot in New York. Bright felt that filming outside the studio made episodes less funny, even when shooting on the lot outside, and that the live audience was an integral part of the series. When the series was criticized for incorrectly depicting New York, with the financially struggling group of friends being able to afford huge apartments, Bright noted that the set had to be big enough for the cameras, lighting, and \"for the audience to be able to see what's going on\"; the apartments also needed to provide a place for the actors to execute the funny scripts. The fourth-season finale was shot on location in London because the producers were aware of the series's popularity in the UK. The scenes were shot in a studio with three audiences each made up of 500 people. These were the show's largest audiences throughout its run. The fifth-season finale, set in Las Vegas, was filmed at Warner Bros. Studios, although Bright met people who thought it was filmed on location.\nSeries finale.\nThe series's creators completed the first draft of the hour-long finale in January 2004, four months before its original airing. Crane, Kauffman and Bright watched the finales of other sitcoms to prepare the episode's outline, paying attention to what worked and what did not. They liked the ones that stayed true to the series, citing the finale of \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" as the gold standard. Crane, Kauffman, and Bright had difficulty writing the finale. They did not want to do \"something high concept, or take the show out of the show.\" The most critical parts of the finale were shot without an audience and with a minimum number of crew members. The main cast enjoyed the finale and were confident that the fans would react similarly:\nNBC heavily promoted the series finale, which was preceded by weeks of media hype. Local NBC affiliates organized viewing parties around the U.S., including an event at Universal CityWalk featuring a special broadcast of the finale on an outdoor Astrovision screen. The finale was the subject of two episodes of \"Dateline NBC\", one of which ran for two\u00a0hours. A one-hour retrospective of clips from previous episodes was shown before to the airing of the episode. Following the finale, \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\" was filmed on the set of the \"Friends\"' Central Perk coffee house, which featured the series's cast as guests. The advertising rates for the finale averaged $2\u00a0million for 30\u00a0seconds of commercial time, breaking the record held by the \"Seinfeld\" finale at $1.7\u00a0million.\nIn the U.S., 52.5\u00a0million viewers watched the finale on May 6, 2004, making it the most-watched entertainment telecast since the \"Seinfeld\" finale in 1998. Although not the most-watched episode of the series, the finale was the fourth\u00a0most-watched series finale in television history, only behind the finales of \"M*A*S*H\", \"Cheers\" and \"Seinfeld\", which were respectively watched by 105, 80.4 and 76.2\u00a0million viewers. The retrospective episode was watched by fewer than 36\u00a0million viewers, and the finale was the second most-watched television broadcast of the year in the United States, only behind the Super Bowl. Following the finales of \"Friends\" and \"Frasier\", media critics speculated about the fate of the sitcom genre. Expressed opinions varied between a signalling of the end of the sitcom genre, a small decline in the large history of the genre, and a general reduction of scripted television in favor of reality shows.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nEarly reviews of the series were mixed; the first season holds a Metacritic score of 65 out of 100, based on 24 sampled reviews, indicating \"generally favourable reviews.\" Tom Feran of \"The Plain Dealer\" wrote that the series traded \"vaguely and less successfully on the hanging-out style of \"Seinfeld\"\", while Ann Hodges of the \"Houston Chronicle\" called it \"the new \"Seinfeld\" wannabe, but it will never be as funny as \"Seinfeld\".\" In the \"Los Angeles Daily News\", Ray Richmond named the series as \"one of the brighter comedies of the new season\", and the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"flat-out the best comedy series of the new season.\"\nThe \"Chicago Sun-Times\" Ginny Holbert found Joey and Rachel's characteristics to be underdeveloped, while Richmond commended the cast as a \"likeable youth ensemble\" with \"good chemistry.\" Robert Bianco of \"USA Today\" was complimentary of Schwimmer, calling him \"terrific.\" He also praised the female leads, but was concerned that Perry's role as Chandler was \"undefined\" and that LeBlanc was \"relying too much on the same brain-dead stud routine that was already tired the last two times he tried it.\" The authors of \"Friends Like Us: The Unofficial Guide to Friends\" thought that the cast was \"trying just a little too hard\", in particular, Perry and Schwimmer.\nAs the series progressed, reviews became more positive, and \"Friends\" became one of the most popular sitcoms of its time. It is now often ranked among the all-time best TV shows. Critics commended the series for having consistently sharp writing and for the chemistry between the main actors. Noel Holston of \"Newsday\", who had dismissed the pilot as a \"so-so \"Seinfeld\" wannabe\" in 1994, repudiated his earlier review after rewatching the episode and felt like writing an apology to the writers. Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com thought that the series \"hit its stride\" in the second season. Havrilesky found the character-specific jokes and situations \"could reliably make you laugh out loud a few times each episode\", and the quality of writing allowed the stories to be \"original and innovative.\" Bill Carter of \"The New York Times\" called the eighth season a \"truly stunning comeback.\" Carter found that by \"generating new hot storylines and high-decibel laughs\", the series made its way \"back into the hearts of its fans.\" However, Liane Bonin of \"Entertainment Weekly\" felt that the direction of the ninth season was a \"disappointing buzzkill\", criticizing it for the non-stop celebrity guest spots and going into jump the shark territory. Although disappointed with the season, Bonin noted that \"the writing [was] still sharp.\" Havrilesky thought that the tenth season was \"alarmingly awful, far worse than you would ever imagine a show that was once so good could be.\" \"Friends\" was featured on \"Time\"s list of \"The 100 Best TV Shows of All-Time\", saying, \"the well-hidden secret of this show was that it called itself \"Friends\", and was really about family.\"\nReviews of the series finale were mixed. \"USA Today\"s Robert Bianco described the finale as entertaining and satisfying and praised it for deftly mixing emotion and humor while highlighting each of the stars. Sarah Rodman of the \"Boston Herald\" praised Aniston and Schwimmer for their acting, but felt that their characters' reunion was \"a bit too neat, even if it was what most of the show's legions of fans wanted.\" Roger Catlin of the \"Hartford Courant\" felt that newcomers to the series would be \"surprised at how laughless the affair could be, and how nearly every strained gag depends on the sheer stupidity of its characters.\" Ken Parish Perkins, writing for \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\", pointed out that the finale was \"more touching than comical, more satisfying in terms of closure than knee-slappingly funny.\"\nIn a 2021 program on ITV Mr Bean writer Richard Curtis accused the Friends writers of stealing the joke which involved Joey getting a turkey stuck on his head in The One with All the Thanksgivings from the 1992 episode Merry Christmas Mr Bean. In that episode Mr Bean got a turkey stuck on his head after losing his watch while stuffing the turkey and put his head in to try and retrieve it. Rowan Atkinson, however, argued that jokes are meant to be stolen, or to inspire.\nAwards.\nTo maintain the series's ensemble format, the main cast members decided to enter themselves in the same acting categories for awards. Beginning with the series's eighth season, the actors decided to submit themselves in the lead actor balloting, rather than in the supporting actor fields. The series was nominated for 62 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning six. Aniston and Kudrow are the only main cast members to win an Emmy, while Cox is the only actor not to be nominated. The series won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2002, receiving nominations in 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, and 2003. The series also won an American Comedy Award, one GLAAD Media Award, one Golden Globe Award, three Logie Awards, six People's Choice Awards, one Satellite Award, and one Screen Actors Guild Award.\nRatings.\nThe table below shows the ratings of \"Friends\" in the United States, where it consistently ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings. \"Rank\" refers to how well \"Friends\" rated compared to other television series that aired during primetime hours of the corresponding television season. It is shown in relation to the total number of series airing on the then-six major English-language networks in a given season. \"Viewers\" refers to the average number of viewers for all original episodes, broadcast during the television season in the series's regular timeslot. The \"season premiere\" is the date that the first episode of the season aired, and the \"season finale\" is the date that the final episode of the season aired. So far, \"Friends\" has been the last sitcom to reach the 1 spot on television, as its successors were \"\", \"American Idol\", \"NBC Sunday Night Football\", and \"NCIS\". Following the September 11 attacks, ratings increased 17% over the previous season.\nSyndication.\nBecause of syndication revenue, \"Friends\" continues to generate approximately $1\u00a0billion each year for Warner Bros. That translates into about $20\u00a0million in annual residuals each for Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer, who each get 2% of syndication income for \"Friends\".\nAll episodes became available on Netflix on January 1, 2015, introducing teenagers to the show. UK \"Friends\" reruns' ratings in 2015 increased by more than 10% annually. reruns' US weekly audience, not including streaming, of 16 million would make it a hit on network television were the show still being produced. In the US the series has a syndication deal through multiple networks including Nick at Nite, TBS, and it also aired on Paramount Network through 2019. However, in July 2019, it was announced that from the beginning of 2020, \"Friends\" would not be available on Netflix in the US and instead would be shown on WarnerMedia's video-streaming service, HBO Max which launched on May 27, 2020.\nCultural impact.\nAlthough the producers thought of \"Friends\" as \"only a TV show\", psychologists investigated the cultural impact of \"Friends\" during the series's run. Aniston's hairstyle was nicknamed \"The Rachel\" and copied around the world. Joey's catchphrase, \"How \"you\" doin'?\", became a popular part of Western English slang, often used as a pick-up line or when greeting friends. The series also influenced the English language, according to a study by the University of Toronto that found that the characters used the emphasized word \"so\" to modify adjectives more often than any other intensifier. Although the preference had already made its way into the American vernacular, usage on the series may have accelerated the change. Chandler's habit of ending a sentence unfinished for sarcasm also influenced viewers' speech.\n\"Friends\" has also been credited in helping non-English speaking students to learn the language. A 2012 poll by Kaplan International English Colleges found that more than a quarter (26%) of its students cited the sitcom as the best show for helping them improve their English. Notable individuals who have also said that the sitcom helped them learn English include Liverpool F.C. manager J\u00fcrgen Klopp, BTS member RM and Belgian professional golfer Thomas Pieters.\n\"Friends\" is parodied in the twelfth season \"Murder, She Wrote\" episode \"Murder Among Friends.\" In the episode, amateur sleuth Jessica Fletcher (Angela Lansbury) investigates the murder of a writer for \"Buds\", a fictional television series about the daily lives of a group of city friends. The episode was devised after CBS moved \"Murder, She Wrote\" from its regular Sunday night timeslot to a Thursday night timeslot directly opposite \"Friends\" on NBC; Angela Lansbury was quoted by Bruce Lansbury, her brother and \"Murder, She Wrote\"s supervising producer, as having \"a bit of an attitude\" about the move to Thursday, but he saw the plot as \"a friendly setup, no mean-spiritedness.\" Jerry Ludwig, the writer of the episode, researched the \"flavor\" of \"Buds\" by watching episodes of \"Friends\". Producers of \"Married... with Children\" attempted to create a spinoff series called \"Enemies\", which was intended to act as an antithesis to \"Friends\" in the same way \"Married... with Children\" had been to family sitcoms such as \"The Cosby Show\". However, the Fox network declined to pick up the series.\nThe Central Perk coffee house, one of the principal settings of the series, is part of the Warner Bros. Studio Tour Hollywood. People sometimes propose marriage on the couch, and many tourists cry when they sit on it. The coffee house has inspired various imitations worldwide. In 2006, Iranian businessman Mojtaba Asadian started a Central Perk franchise, registering the name in 32 countries. The decor of the coffee houses is inspired by \"Friends\", featuring replica couches, counters, neon signage and bricks. The coffee houses also contain paintings of the various characters from the series, and televisions playing \"Friends\" episodes. James Michael Tyler, who plays the Central Perk manager in the series, Gunther, attended the grand opening of the Dubai caf\u00e9, where he worked as a waiter. Central Perk was rebuilt as part of a museum exhibit at Warner Bros. Studios and was shown on \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\" in October 2008.\nJennifer Aniston visited the set for the first time since the series finale in 2004. From September 24 to October 7, 2009, a Central Perk replica was based at Broadwick Street, Soho, London. The coffee house sold real coffee to customers and featured a display of \"Friends\" memorabilia and props, such as the Geller Cup from the season three episode \"The One with the Football.\" In Beijing, business owner Du Xin opened a coffee shop named Central Perk in March 2010.\nIn India, there are six \"Friends\"-themed cafes, located in Chandigarh (named Central Perk); Kolkata; and West Bengal (named F.R.I.E.N.D.S. Cafe), which features many icons from the original T.V. series, including Chandler and Joey's ugly dog statue, the orange sofa, the purple door of Monica and Rachel's apartment, and Phoebe's pink bicycle. The other three cafes are located in Delhi, Gurgaon; Bhubaneswar, Odisha; and Pune, Maharashtra. There are two \"Friends\" themed cafes in Pakistan as wellone in Lahore, Punjab known as \"Friends Cafe\" and the other in Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa called \"Central Perk\". Both of those cafes have an iconic couch, a guitar and foosball table, quotes from the show on the walls and even episode reruns on a projector. They're also planning to have their own Gunther at the bar. In 2016, a Central Perk replica was opened in Outram, Singapore. It is the only Central Perk that has been given the intellectual property rights by Warner Bros. outside of the United States. The caf\u00e9 also includes feature walls, replicating the walls of the main characters' apartments and memorabilia and props used on the show. In August 2019, it was announced that a Central Perk Lego set would be launched to mark the show's 25 anniversary.\n\"Friends\" has also developed an alternative family lifestyle by representing young people that live unconventional domestic lives. It presents the idea that \"all you need is good friends\" and can construct families through choice. The audience is able to identify with the program through the troubles seen on weekly episodes. It portrays a new way of living life and developing relationships which are not normally seen in conventional society. According to a pop-culture expert at the University at Buffalo, \"Friends\" is \"one of those rare shows that marked a change in American culture.\" The images of youth and the roles they portray are better defined and represent a lifestyle that centres around creating and sustaining relationships between friends running their own lives and seeking help from each other.\n\"Vox\" stated that \"Friends\" impacted the creation of other conflictless \"hangout sitcoms\", with groups of adult friends who are funny and have similar character traits. One example of this is \"How I Met Your Mother\", which \"The Guardian\"s TV and radio blog notes also shares its setting with \"Friends\", Manhattan. Other examples include \"The Big Bang Theory\", \"New Girl\", and \"Happy Endings\".\nReaders of \"TV Guide\" voted the cast of \"Friends\" their Best Comedy cast of all time, ranking at 29% of the votes, beating \"Seinfeld\", which registered 18%. A poll undertaken by \"60 Minutes\" and \"Vanity Fair\" named \"Friends\" the third greatest sitcom of all time. In 2014, the series was ranked by \"Mundo Estranho\" the Best TV Series of All Time. A 2015 survey by \"The Hollywood Reporter\" of 2,800 actors, producers, directors, and other industry people named \"Friends\" as their No. 1 favorite show.\nReunion.\nOn November 12, 2019, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" announced that Warner Bros TV is developing a Friends reunion for HBO Max that would feature the whole cast and creators returning. On February 21, 2020, HBO confirmed that the unscripted reunion special, tentatively named \"The One Where They Got Back Together\", was set to be released in May the same year, along with the 236 original episodes of the series. On March 18, 2020, it was announced that the special, which was set to film on the \"Friends\" stage on March 23 and 24, had been postponed indefinitely, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In November 2020, Matthew Perry tweeted that the reunion is set to start filming in March 2021.\nDistribution.\nBroadcast.\nUnited States.\nAfter the produced pilot lived up to NBC's hopes, the series premiered with the name \"Friends\" on September 22, 1994, in the coveted Thursday 8:30\u00a0p.m. time slot. The pilot aired between \"Mad About You\" and \"Seinfeld\", and was watched by almost 22\u00a0million American viewers. The series was a huge success throughout its run and was a staple of NBC's Thursday night line-up, dubbed by the network as Must See TV. When Crane told reporters in 2001 that the ninth season was a possibility, critics believed that he was posturing and that at least two of the cast members would not sign on for another season. When it was confirmed that \"Friends\" would return for a ninth season, the news was mainly about the amount of money\u2014$7\u00a0million per episode\u2014that it took to bring the series back for another season.\nAfter year-long expectations that the ninth season would be the series's last, NBC signed a deal in late December 2002 to bring the series back for a final tenth season. The series's creative team did not want to extend negotiations into the next year and wanted to start writing the rest of the ninth-season episodes and a potential series finale. NBC agreed to pay $10\u00a0million to Warner Bros. for the production of each tenth-season episode, the highest price in television history for a 30-minute series. Although NBC was unable to bring in enough advertising revenue from commercials to cover the costs, the series was integral to the Thursday night schedule, which brought high ratings and profits to the other television series. The cast demanded that the tenth season be reduced from the usual 24\u00a0episodes to 18\u00a0episodes to allow them to work on outside projects.\nIn fall 2001, Warner Bros. Domestic Cable made a deal with sister network TBS (both are owned by Time Warner) to air the series in rerun syndication. Warner Bros. Domestic Cable announced that it had sold additional cable rights to \"Friends\" to Nick at Nite which began airing in the fall of 2011 (unlike the TBS and broadcast syndication airings, Nick at Nite broadcasts of the series, which began airing as part of a seven-night launch marathon on September 5, 2011, replace the end credit tag scenes with marginalized credits featuring promotions for the series and other Nick at Nite programs). Warner Bros. was expected to make $200\u00a0million in license fees and advertising from the deal. Nick at Nite paid $500,000 per episode to air the episodes after 6\u00a0pm. ET for six years through fall 2017. In syndication until 2005, \"Friends\" had earned $4\u00a0million per episode in cash license fees for a total of $944\u00a0million.\nComedy Central began airing reruns of \"Friends\" on October 12, 2019.\nInternational.\nHaving already made huge success in the United States, \"Friends\" producers decided to air the show in Europe. It premiered in the UK on April 28, 1995, with Season 1 broadcasting until September on Channel 4 at 9:30 PM on Friday nights, and immediately was a success. The popularity of the show even allowed the theme song by the Rembrandts to hit number 3 in the UK Singles Charts in September 1995. The popularity of the show in Britain also led to an episode being produced in London at the end of the fourth season, starring a British actress, Helen Baxendale who became a leading character in seasons four and five during her relationship with Ross. The show has since aired on different channels in the UK in their original, unedited international versions prior to their being re-edited for US broadcast and syndication. These versions, with additional footage not seen domestically, have aired on such stations as Channel 4, Sky1, E4, and Comedy Central UK. On September 4, 2011, \"Friends\" officially ended on E4 after the channel re-ran the series since 2004. Comedy Central took over the rights to air the program from October 2011. Since 2018 Channel 5 started airing the program. In the Republic of Ireland, each season of the show made its European debut on RT\u00c92. After 2004 RT\u00c92 began to repeat the series from the start before moving over to TV3 and its digital channel 3e in 2010. , repeats of the show have returned to RT\u00c92 while also broadcasting on Comedy Central Ireland.\nSeries 10's finale in the UK, broadcast on May 28, 2004, was on Channel 4. It was broadcast from 9\u00a0pm to 10\u00a0pm and attracted \"Friends\"' largest UK audiences. It attracted almost 10 million viewers, and is currently standing at Number 10 in Channel 4's most-watched shows. \"Big Brother\" was moved to 10\u00a0pm, which \"Friends\" had beaten. \"Friends\" got 9.6\u00a0million viewers at 9\u00a0pm, while \"Big Brother 5\"s launch attracted 7.2\u00a0million viewers at 10\u00a0pm, which is the most-watched premiere on UK TV ever. However, on January 3, 2007, \"Celebrity Big Brother 5\"s launch was watched by 7.3\u00a0million viewers, and its eviction on January 19, 2007, was watched by 8.7\u00a0million viewers.\n\"Friends\" has aired in Australia on the Seven Network (season 1 only), Nine Network (season 2\u201310), Network Ten (2007\u201309, repeats), on GEM (a sub-channel of the Nine Network), and on pay TV channel TV Hits formerly aired on Arena, 111 Hits. The show is broadcast on TV2 in New Zealand.\nIn Canada, the series was broadcast on Global. In later years, it was syndicated on several of its cable sibling networks, including Slice, DTour, and TVTropolis, its previous incarnation.\nIn Latin America, the first seven seasons aired on Sony, and the remaining seasons on Warner. In Brazil, free-to-air networks RedeTV! and SBT also aired a few seasons.\nIn India, the show is broadcast by Comedy Central at various times. It is the most-watched English language show in the country.\nIn the Philippines, the show was originally aired on ABC-5 from 1996 to 2005 and ETC from 2005 to 2014.\nIn Greece, the show was broadcast on Star Channel. In Cyprus, \"Friends\" aired on CyBC 2 while reruns air on TVOne.\nRemastering.\nBeginning on March 5, 2012, high definition versions of all 236 \"Friends\" episodes were made available to local broadcast stations, starting with the pilot episode. For the remastered episodes, Warner Bros. restored previously cropped images on the left and right sides of the screen, using the original 35 mm film source, to use the entire widescreen frame. However, because the show was not originally filmed for widescreen, but rather filmed in 4-perf format and protected for 4:3, some cropping problems arise in some shots where information from the top and bottom of the frame is removed, and some expanded shots reveal unintentional artifacts, including set edges, boom mics and body doubles replacing some of the main cast. In early versions of the HD remasters, there were also a few shots, including chroma effects shots, which were sourced from standard-definition 480i videotape sources, as not all of the footage had been located in time for the remaster; the original film sources for these shots were later rescanned for later broadcast and release. These masters had been airing in New Zealand on TV2 since January 2011 and the earlier HD prints continue to air on Comedy Central in the UK as of 2020. Netflix added all ten seasons of \"Friends\" in high definition to their streaming service in the United States on January 1, 2015.\nHome media.\nStreaming.\nIn October 2014, Warner Bros. chairman and chief executive officer, Kevin Tsujihara, announced that the company had licensed the North American streaming rights of all ten seasons of \"Friends\" to Netflix, in a deal said to be worth around $500,000 an episode, or about $120\u00a0million in total. The show became available on Netflix from January 1, 2015. The Netflix airings are the versions aired on NBC rather than the longer international versions, as discussed below. The series left Netflix in the US on January 1, 2020, as it began streaming on HBO Max on May 27, 2020.\nBlu-ray and DVD.\nAll ten seasons have been released on DVD individually and as a box set. Each Region 1 season release contains special features and are presented in their aforementioned original international broadcast versions, although Region 2 releases are as originally aired domestically. For the first season, each episode is updated with color correction and sound enhancement. A wide range of \"Friends\" merchandise has been produced by various companies. In September 1995, WEA Records released the first album of music from \"Friends\", the \"Friends Original TV Soundtrack\", containing music featured in previous and future episodes. The soundtrack debuted on the \"Billboard\" 200 at number 46, and sold 500,000\u00a0copies in November 1995. In 1999, a second soundtrack album entitled \"Friends Again\" was released. Other merchandise includes a \"Friends\" version of the DVD game \"Scene\u00a0It?\", and a quiz video game for PlayStation\u00a02 and PC entitled \"Friends: The One with All the Trivia\". On September 28, 2009, a box set was released in the UK celebrating the series's 15th anniversary. The box set contained extended episodes, an episode guide, and original special features.\nWarner Home Video released a complete series collection on Blu-ray on November 13, 2012. The collection does not feature the extra deleted scenes and jokes that were included on prior DVD releases, and are therefore presented in their NBC broadcast versions.\nIn Australia, the original released DVDs were released were fold out box sets which contained three discs and released as follows: Season 1 and Season 2 on March 13, 2002, Season 3 and Season 4 on July 9, 2002, Season 5, 6 and 7 on July 29, 2002, Season 8 on March 18, 2003, Season 9 on February 11, 2004, and Season 10 on November 24, 2004. Repackaged sets, slimmed into regular DVD cases also containing three discs were released from 2003 to 2004. Collector's Edition sets were released from September 9, 2003, through to February 1, 2006, these sets contains 4 discs, in fat DVD cases, with extra bonus material. On October 4, 2006, the individual seasons were repackaged into regular DVD case sets and marked as \"Including Brand New Bonus Disc\". Once again each individual season were repackaged with new artwork on March 31, 2010. The first complete series boxset on DVD was released around 2004 or 2005, this was titled 'The One With All Ten Seasons\" and the packaging was a black box with a lift up lid and contains exclusive packaging for all ten seasons. The second complete series boxset was released August 21, 2013 and was a red box which contained the 2010 individual season sets inside. On October 1, 2014 was the 20th Anniversary boxset, this was a white box and contained the same 2010 individual releases inside. On October 7, 2015, another boxset was released 'The One With All Ten Seasons\", the same name used on the original boxset, however this time slimmed down and contains the 2010 individual releases inside. The outer box is open on insert side for the cases to slide in and out, more of a budget release. In 2016, a repackaged 'The Complete Series' Blu-Ray boxset was issued, contenting the same 10 individual season in the original set, however the box is more cut down and is opened on one side, and also does not include the book that contained the episode guide.\nSpin-off.\n\"Joey\".\nAfter the series finale in 2004, LeBlanc signed on for the spin-off series, \"Joey\", following Joey's move to Los Angeles to pursue his acting career. Kauffman and Crane were not interested in the spin-off, although Bright agreed to executive produce the series with Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg-Meehan. NBC heavily promoted \"Joey\" and gave it \"Friends\"' Thursday 8:00\u00a0pm timeslot. The pilot was watched by 18.6\u00a0million American viewers, but ratings continually decreased throughout the series's two seasons, averaging 10.2\u00a0million viewers in the first season and 7.1\u00a0million in the second. The final broadcast episode on March 7, 2006, was watched by 7.09\u00a0million viewers; NBC cancelled the series on May 15, 2006, after two\u00a0seasons, leaving eight episodes unaired. Bright blamed the collaboration between NBC executives, the studio and other producers for quickly ruining the series:\nFurther reading.\nArticles concerning the cultural influence of the program:"}
{"id": "11316", "revid": "6817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11316", "title": "Fundamental forces", "text": ""}
{"id": "11317", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11317", "title": "Frankish", "text": "Frankish may refer to:"}
{"id": "11318", "revid": "1013002603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11318", "title": "FBI Most Wanted Terrorists", "text": "The FBI Most Wanted Terrorists is a list created and first released on October 10, 2001, with the authority of United States President Bush, following the September 11 attacks on the United States. Initially, the list contained 22 of the top suspected terrorists chosen by the FBI, all of whom had earlier been indicted for acts of terrorism between 1985 and 1998. None of the 22 had been captured by US or other authorities by that date. Of the 22, only Osama Bin Laden was by then already listed on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list.\nNo particular legal consequences flowed from the creation of and inclusion on the list. On January 17, 2002, the FBI released a third major FBI wanted list, which has now become known as the FBI Seeking Information \u2013 War on Terrorism list, to enlist the public's help in reporting information which may prevent future terrorist attacks. The information sought to be reported is not necessarily relating to any person on any of the FBI wanted lists. \nInitial persons alleged to be terrorist fugitives.\nOn the fugitive group wanted poster, the FBI did not list the persons in any particular stated order, except perhaps for the consistent placing of bin Laden in the number one position of the top row. However, the 22 can easily fit into distinct categories over the two decades, based on the terrorist attacks in which they were, according to US authorities, involved.\nFor organization and ease of reference here, the relevant major terrorist attacks are listed by date below, with a brief summary for each, identifying the terror cells most directly responsible for the attack. The 22 on the list are then grouped beneath the attack for which each person was first accused of involvement.\nFBI Seeking Information \u2013 War on Terrorism list.\nWhereas the Most Wanted Terrorists list is reserved for terrorist fugitives who have been indicted by federal grand juries, the FBI recognized a further need to achieve a much quicker response time in order to prevent any future attacks which may be in the current planning stages. To enlist the public's help in this effort, the FBI sought a way to deliver the early known suspected terror attack information, often very limited, out to the public as quickly as possible. So, on January 17, 2002, the third major FBI wanted list was first released, which has now become known as the FBI Seeking Information \u2013 Terrorism list.\nAs the name of this list implies, the FBI's intent is to acquire any critical information from the public, as soon as possible, about the suspected terrorists, who may be in the planning stages of terror attacks against United States nationals at home and abroad. The first such list profiled five persons about whom little was known, but who were suspected of plotting terrorist attacks in martyrdom operations. The main evidence against the five was five videos they had produced, found in the rubble of Mohammed Atef's destroyed home outside Kabul, Afghanistan.\nAdditions to the list.\nBy 2006, more than four years had passed since the FBI had listed the original 22 alleged terrorists on the Most Wanted Terrorist list. Of those 22, by then four had been qualified for removal from the list, due to death or capture. Also by then, the FBI determined that new persons qualified to be listed as Most Wanted Terrorists. Some of these persons were indicted for attacks and plots that had taken place since the original list had been compiled. The original indictments had been for incidents only through 1998. Since then, the U.S. had become victim to at least two major terror attacks, which would generate some of the new indictments for the Most Wanted Terrorists, notably:\nIn addition, after the original 2001 list had been compiled and released to the public, the U.S. had foiled and issued indictments for numerous other plots, involving some new listed Most Wanted Terrorists. Those notable other plots involved:\nIn February 2006, the FBI completed two groups of additions to the Most Wanted Terrorists list, the first such additions in over four years. On February 24, 2006, the day after adding two name to the list, the FBI added an additional six fugitive terrorists, for various plots and attacks. One of the entries was for an indictment dating back to the June 14, 1985, hijacking of TWA flight 847 by Hezbollah (see above).\nAdditionally, the FBI also added to the Seeking Information \u2013 War on Terrorism list an additional three persons, most notably, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the notorious leader of Al-Qaeda in Iraq. This marked the first time that al-Zarqawi had appeared on any of the three major FBI wanted lists. On June 8, 2006, ABC News reported that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was confirmed to have been killed in Baghdad in a bombing raid by a United States task force. His death was confirmed by multiple sources in Iraq, including the United States government.\nRewards.\nSince 1984, the United States government has also used the Rewards for Justice Program, which pays monetary rewards of up to $5 million, or now, in some cases more, upon special authorization by the United States Secretary of State, to individuals who provide information which substantially leads to countering of terrorist attacks against United States persons. More than $100 million had been paid to over 60 people through this program.\nThe Rewards for Justice Program was established by the 1984 Act to Combat International Terrorism, Public Law 98-533, and is administered by the Bureau of Diplomatic Security, within the U.S. Department of State."}
{"id": "11319", "revid": "1013137608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11319", "title": "Francis Bacon", "text": "Francis Bacon, 1st Viscount St Alban, (; 22 January 1561 \u2013 9 April 1626), also known as Lord Verulam, was an English philosopher and statesman who served as Attorney General and as Lord Chancellor of England. His works are seen as developing the scientific method and remained influential through the scientific revolution.\nBacon has been called the father of empiricism. He argued for the possibility of scientific knowledge based only upon inductive reasoning and careful observation of events in nature. Most importantly, he argued science could be achieved by use of a sceptical and methodical approach whereby scientists aim to avoid misleading themselves. Although his most specific proposals about such a method, the Baconian method, did not have long-lasting influence, the general idea of the importance and possibility of a sceptical methodology makes Bacon the father of the scientific method. This method was a new rhetorical and theoretical framework for science, whose practical details are still central to debates on science and methodology.\nFrancis Bacon was a patron of libraries and developed a system for cataloguing books under three categories \u2014 history, poetry, and philosophy \u2014which could further be divided into specific subjects and subheadings. Bacon was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he rigorously followed the medieval curriculum, largely in Latin.\nBacon was the first recipient of the Queen's counsel designation, conferred in 1597 when Elizabeth I of England reserved him as her legal advisor. After the accession of James VI and I in 1603, Bacon was knighted, then created Baron Verulam in 1618 and Viscount St Alban in 1621.\nHe had no heirs and so both titles became extinct on his death in 1626 at the age of 65. He died of pneumonia, with one account by John Aubrey stating that he had contracted it while studying the effects of freezing on meat preservation. He is buried at St Michael's Church, St Albans, Hertfordshire.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nFrancis Bacon was born on 22 January 1561 at York House near the Strand in London, the son of Sir Nicholas Bacon (Lord Keeper of the Great Seal) by his second wife, Anne (Cooke) Bacon, the daughter of the noted Renaissance humanist Anthony Cooke. His mother's sister was married to William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, making Burghley Bacon's uncle.\nBiographers believe that Bacon was educated at home in his early years owing to poor health, which would plague him throughout his life. He received tuition from John Walsall, a graduate of Oxford with a strong leaning toward Puritanism. He went up to Trinity College at the University of Cambridge on 5 April 1573 at the age of 12, living for three years there, together with his older brother Anthony Bacon under the personal tutelage of Dr John Whitgift, future Archbishop of Canterbury. Bacon's education was conducted largely in Latin and followed the medieval curriculum. It was at Cambridge that Bacon first met Queen Elizabeth, who was impressed by his precocious intellect, and was accustomed to calling him \"The young lord keeper\".\nHis studies brought him to the belief that the methods and results of science as then practised were erroneous. His reverence for Aristotle conflicted with his rejection of Aristotelian philosophy, which seemed to him barren, disputatious and wrong in its objectives.\nOn 27 June 1576, he and Anthony entered \"de societate magistrorum\" at Gray's Inn. A few months later, Francis went abroad with Sir Amias Paulet, the English ambassador at Paris, while Anthony continued his studies at home. The state of government and society in France under Henry III afforded him valuable political instruction. For the next three years he visited Blois, Poitiers, Tours, Italy, and Spain. There is no evidence that he studied at the University of Poitiers. During his travels, Bacon studied language, statecraft, and civil law while performing routine diplomatic tasks. On at least one occasion he delivered diplomatic letters to England for Walsingham, Burghley, and Leicester, as well as for the queen.\nThe sudden death of his father in February 1579 prompted Bacon to return to England. Sir Nicholas had laid up a considerable sum of money to purchase an estate for his youngest son, but he died before doing so, and Francis was left with only a fifth of that money. Having borrowed money, Bacon got into debt. To support himself, he took up his residence in law at Gray's Inn in 1579, his income being supplemented by a grant from his mother Lady Anne of the manor of Marks near Romford in Essex, which generated a rent of \u00a346.\nParliamentarian.\nBacon stated that he had three goals: to uncover truth, to serve his country, and to serve his church. He sought to further these ends by seeking a prestigious post. In 1580, through his uncle, Lord Burghley, he applied for a post at court that might enable him to pursue a life of learning, but his application failed. For two years he worked quietly at Gray's Inn, until he was admitted as an outer barrister in 1582.\nHis parliamentary career began when he was elected MP for Bossiney, Cornwall, in a by-election in 1581. In 1584 he took his seat in Parliament for Melcombe in Dorset, and in 1586 for Taunton. At this time, he began to write on the condition of parties in the church, as well as on the topic of philosophical reform in the lost tract \"Temporis Partus Maximus\". Yet he failed to gain a position that he thought would lead him to success. He showed signs of sympathy to Puritanism, attending the sermons of the Puritan chaplain of Gray's Inn and accompanying his mother to the Temple Church to hear Walter Travers. This led to the publication of his earliest surviving tract, which criticized the English church's suppression of the Puritan clergy. In the Parliament of 1586, he openly urged execution for the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots.\nAbout this time, he again approached his powerful uncle for help; this move was followed by his rapid progress at the bar. He became a bencher in 1586 and was elected a Reader in 1587, delivering his first set of lectures in Lent the following year. In 1589, he received the valuable appointment of reversion to the Clerkship of the Star Chamber, although he did not formally take office until 1608; the post was worth \u00a31,600 a year.\nIn 1588 he became MP for Liverpool and then for Middlesex in 1593. He later sat three times for Ipswich (1597, 1601, 1604) and once for Cambridge University (1614).\nHe became known as a liberal-minded reformer, eager to amend and simplify the law. Though a friend of the crown, he opposed feudal privileges and dictatorial powers. He spoke against religious persecution. He struck at the House of Lords in its usurpation of the Money Bills. He advocated for the union of England and Scotland, which made him a significant influence toward the consolidation of the United Kingdom; and he later would advocate for the integration of Ireland into the Union. Closer constitutional ties, he believed, would bring greater peace and strength to these countries.\nFinal years of the Queen's reign.\nBacon soon became acquainted with The 2nd Earl of Essex, Queen Elizabeth's favourite. By 1591 he acted as the earl's confidential adviser.\nIn 1592 he was commissioned to write a tract in response to the Jesuit Robert Parson's anti-government polemic, which he titled \"Certain observations made upon a libel\", identifying England with the ideals of democratic Athens against the belligerence of Spain.\nBacon took his third parliamentary seat for Middlesex when in February 1593 Elizabeth summoned Parliament to investigate a Roman Catholic plot against her. Bacon's opposition to a bill that would levy triple subsidies in half the usual time offended the Queen: opponents accused him of seeking popularity, and for a time the Court excluded him from favour.\nWhen the office of Attorney General fell vacant in 1594, Lord Essex's influence was not enough to secure the position for Bacon and it was given to Sir Edward Coke. Likewise, Bacon failed to secure the lesser office of Solicitor General in 1595, the Queen pointedly snubbing him by appointing Sir Thomas Fleming instead. To console him for these disappointments, Essex presented him with a property at Twickenham, which Bacon subsequently sold for \u00a31,800.\nIn 1597 Bacon became the first Queen's Counsel designate, when Queen Elizabeth reserved him as her legal counsel. In 1597, he was also given a patent, giving him precedence at the Bar. Despite his designations, he was unable to gain the status and notoriety of others. In a plan to revive his position he unsuccessfully courted the wealthy young widow Lady Elizabeth Hatton. His courtship failed after she broke off their relationship upon accepting marriage to Sir Edward Coke, a further spark of enmity between the men. In 1598 Bacon was arrested for debt. Afterward, however, his standing in the Queen's eyes improved. Gradually, Bacon earned the standing of one of the learned counsels. His relationship with the Queen further improved when he severed ties with Essex\u2014a shrewd move, as Essex would be executed for treason in 1601.\nWith others, Bacon was appointed to investigate the charges against Essex. A number of Essex's followers confessed that Essex had planned a rebellion against the Queen. Bacon was subsequently a part of the legal team headed by the Attorney General Sir Edward Coke at Essex's treason trial. After the execution, the Queen ordered Bacon to write the official government account of the trial, which was later published as \"A DECLARATION of the Practices and Treasons attempted and committed by Robert late Earle of Essex and his Complices, against her Majestie and her Kingdoms ...\" after Bacon's first draft was heavily edited by the Queen and her ministers.\nAccording to his personal secretary and chaplain, William Rawley, as a judge Bacon was always tender-hearted, \"looking upon the examples with the eye of severity, but upon the person with the eye of pity and compassion\". And also that \"he was free from malice\", \"no revenger of injuries\", and \"no defamer of any man\".\nJames I comes to the throne.\nThe succession of James I brought Bacon into greater favour. He was knighted in 1603. In another shrewd move, Bacon wrote his \"Apologies\" in defense of his proceedings in the case of Essex, as Essex had favoured James to succeed to the throne.\nThe following year, during the course of the uneventful first parliament session, Bacon married Alice Barnham. In June 1607 he was at last rewarded with the office of solicitor generaland in 1608 he began working as the Clerkship of the Star Chamber. Despite a generous income, old debts still could not be paid. He sought further promotion and wealth by supporting King James and his arbitrary policies.\nIn 1610 the fourth session of James's first parliament met. Despite Bacon's advice to him, James and the Commons found themselves at odds over royal prerogatives and the king's embarrassing extravagance. The House was finally dissolved in February 1611. Throughout this period Bacon managed to stay in the favor of the king while retaining the confidence of the Commons.\nIn 1613 Bacon was finally appointed attorney general, after advising the king to shuffle judicial appointments. As attorney general, Bacon, by his zealous efforts\u2014which included torture\u2014to obtain the conviction of Edmund Peacham for treason, raised legal controversies of high constitutional importance; and successfully prosecuted Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset, and his wife, Frances Howard, Countess of Somerset, for murder in 1616. The so-called Prince's Parliament of April 1614 objected to Bacon's presence in the seat for Cambridge and to the various royal plans that Bacon had supported. Although he was allowed to stay, parliament passed a law that forbade the attorney general to sit in parliament. His influence over the king had evidently inspired resentment or apprehension in many of his peers. Bacon, however, continued to receive the King's favour, which led to his appointment in March 1617 as temporary Regent of England (for a period of a month), and in 1618 as Lord Chancellor. On 12 July 1618 the king created Bacon Baron Verulam, of Verulam, in the Peerage of England; he then became known as Francis, Lord Verulam.\nBacon continued to use his influence with the king to mediate between the throne and Parliament, and in this capacity he was further elevated in the same peerage, as Viscount St Alban, on 27 January 1621.\nLord Chancellor and public disgrace.\nBacon's public career ended in disgrace in 1621. After he fell into debt, a parliamentary committee on the administration of the law charged him with 23 separate counts of corruption. His lifelong enemy, Sir Edward Coke, who had instigated these accusations, was one of those appointed to prepare the charges against the chancellor. To the lords, who sent a committee to enquire whether a confession was really his, he replied, \"My lords, it is my act, my hand, and my heart; I beseech your lordships to be merciful to a broken reed.\" He was sentenced to a fine of \u00a340,000 and committed to the Tower of London at the king's pleasure; the imprisonment lasted only a few days and the fine was remitted by the king. More seriously, parliament declared Bacon incapable of holding future office or sitting in parliament. He narrowly escaped undergoing degradation, which would have stripped him of his titles of nobility. Subsequently, the disgraced viscount devoted himself to study and writing.\nThere seems little doubt that Bacon had accepted gifts from litigants, but this was an accepted custom of the time and not necessarily evidence of deeply corrupt behaviour. While acknowledging that his conduct had been lax, he countered that he had never allowed gifts to influence his judgement and, indeed, he had on occasion given a verdict against those who had paid him. He even had an interview with King James in which he assured:\nHe also wrote the following to Buckingham:\nThe true reason for his acknowledgement of guilt is the subject of debate, but some authors speculate that it may have been prompted by his sickness, or by a view that through his fame and the greatness of his office he would be spared harsh punishment. He may even have been blackmailed, with a threat to charge him with sodomy, into confession.\nThe British jurist Basil Montagu wrote in Bacon's defense, concerning the episode of his public disgrace:\nPersonal life.\nReligious beliefs.\nBacon was a devout Anglican. He believed that philosophy and the natural world must be studied inductively, but argued that we can only study arguments for the existence of God. Information on his attributes (such as nature, action, and purposes) can only come from special revelation. But Bacon also held that knowledge was cumulative, that study encompassed more than a simple preservation of the past. \"Knowledge is the rich storehouse for the glory of the Creator and the relief of man's estate,\" he wrote. In his Essays, he affirms that \"a little philosophy inclineth man's mind to atheism, but depth in philosophy bringeth men's minds about to religion.\"\nBacon's idea of idols of the mind may have self-consciously represented an attempt to Christianize science at the same time as developing a new, reliable scientific method; Bacon gave worship of Neptune as an example of the idola tribus fallacy, hinting at the religious dimensions of his critique of the idols.\nMarriage to Alice Barnham.\nWhen he was 36, Bacon courted Elizabeth Hatton, a young widow of 20. Reportedly, she broke off their relationship upon accepting marriage to a wealthier man, Bacon's rival, Sir Edward Coke. Years later, Bacon still wrote of his regret that the marriage to Hatton had not taken place.\nAt the age of 45, Bacon married Alice Barnham, the almost 14-year-old daughter of a well-connected London alderman and MP. Bacon wrote two sonnets proclaiming his love for Alice. The first was written during his courtship and the second on his wedding day, 10 May 1606. When Bacon was appointed lord chancellor, \"by special Warrant of the King\", Lady Bacon was given precedence over all other Court ladies. Bacon's personal secretary and chaplain, William Rawley, wrote in his biography of Bacon that his marriage was one of \"much conjugal love and respect\", mentioning a robe of honour that he gave to Alice and which \"she wore unto her dying day, being twenty years and more after his death\".\nHowever, an increasing number of reports circulated about friction in the marriage, with speculation that this may have been due to Alice's making do with less money than she had once been accustomed to. It was said that she was strongly interested in fame and fortune, and when household finances dwindled, she complained bitterly. Bunten wrote in her \"Life of Alice Barnham\"\u00a0 that, upon their descent into debt, she went on trips to ask for financial favours and assistance from their circle of friends. Bacon disinherited her upon discovering her secret romantic relationship with Sir John Underhill. He subsequently rewrote his will, which had previously been very generous\u2014leaving her lands, goods, and income\u2014and instead revoked it all.\nSexuality.\nSeveral authors believe that, despite his marriage, Bacon was primarily attracted to men. Forker, for example, has explored the \"historically documentable sexual preferences\" of both Francis Bacon and King James I and concluded they were both oriented to \"masculine love\", a contemporary term that \"seems to have been used exclusively to refer to the sexual preference of men for members of their own gender.\"\nThe well-connected antiquary John Aubrey noted in his \"Brief Lives\" concerning Bacon, \"He was a Pederast. His Ganimeds and Favourites tooke Bribes\". (\"Pederast\" in Renaissance diction meant generally \"homosexual\" rather than specifically a lover of minors; \"ganimed\" derives from the mythical prince abducted by Zeus to be his cup-bearer and bed warmer.)\u00a0\nThe Jacobean antiquarian, Sir Simonds D'Ewes (Bacon's fellow Member of Parliament) implied there had been a question of bringing him to trial for buggery, which his brother Anthony Bacon had also been charged with.\nIn his \"Autobiography and Correspondence\", in the diary entry for 3 May 1621, the date of Bacon's censure by Parliament, D'Ewes describes Bacon's love for his Welsh serving-men, in particular Godrick, a \"very effeminate-faced youth\" whom he calls \"his catamite and bedfellow\".\nThis conclusion has been disputed by others, who point to lack of consistent evidence, and consider the sources to be more open to interpretation. Publicly, at least, Bacon distanced himself from the idea of homosexuality. In his \"New Atlantis\", he described his utopian island as being \"the chastest nation under heaven\", and \"as for masculine love, they have no touch of it\".\nDeath.\nOn 9 April 1626, Francis Bacon died of pneumonia while at Arundel mansion at Highgate outside London. An influential account of the circumstances of his death was given by John Aubrey's \"Brief Lives\". Aubrey's vivid account, which portrays Bacon as a martyr to experimental scientific method, had him journeying to High-gate through the snow with the King's physician when he is suddenly inspired by the possibility of using the snow to preserve meat:They were resolved they would try the experiment presently. They alighted out of the coach and went into a poor woman's house at the bottom of Highgate hill, and bought a fowl, and made the woman exenterate it.\nAfter stuffing the fowl with snow, Bacon contracted a fatal case of pneumonia. Some people, including Aubrey, consider these two contiguous, possibly coincidental events as related and causative of his death:The Snow so chilled him that he immediately fell so extremely ill, that he could not return to his Lodging \u2026 but went to the Earle of Arundel's house at Highgate, where they put him into \u2026 a damp bed that had not been layn-in \u2026 which gave him such a cold that in 2 or 3 days as I remember Mr Hobbes told me, he died of Suffocation.Aubrey has been criticized for his evident credulousness in this and other works; on the other hand, he knew Thomas Hobbes, Bacon's fellow-philosopher and friend.\nBeing unwittingly on his deathbed, the philosopher dictated his last letter to his absent host and friend Lord Arundel:My very good Lord,\u2014I was likely to have had the fortune of Caius Plinius the elder, who lost his life by trying an experiment about the burning of Mount Vesuvius; for I was also desirous to try an experiment or two touching the conservation and in-duration of bodies. As for the experiment itself, it succeeded excellently well; but in the journey between London and High-gate, I was taken with such a fit of casting as I know not whether it were the Stone, or some surfeit or cold, or indeed a touch of them all three. But when I came to your Lordship's House, I was not able to go back, and therefore was forced to take up my lodging here, where your housekeeper is very careful and diligent about me, which I assure myself your Lordship will not only pardon towards him, but think the better of him for it. For indeed your Lordship's House was happy to me, and I kiss your noble hands for the welcome which I am sure you give me to it. I know how unfit it is for me to write with any other hand than mine own, but by my troth my fingers are so disjointed with sickness that I cannot steadily hold a pen.\nAnother account appears in a biography by William Rawley, Bacon's personal secretary and chaplain:He died on the ninth day of April in the year 1626, in the early morning of the day then celebrated for our Savior's resurrection, in the sixty-sixth year of his age, at the Earl of Arundel's house in Highgate, near London, to which place he casually repaired about a week before; God so ordaining that he should die there of a gentle fever, accidentally accompanied with a great cold, whereby the defluxion of rheum fell so plentifully upon his breast, that he died by suffocation.\nHe was buried in St Michael's church in St Albans. At the news of his death, over 30 great minds collected together their eulogies of him, which were then later published in Latin. \nHe left personal assets of about \u00a37,000 and lands that realised \u00a36,000 when sold. His debts amounted to more than \u00a323,000, equivalent to more than \u00a33m at current value.\nPhilosophy and works.\nFrancis Bacon's philosophy is displayed in the vast and varied writings he left, which might be divided into three great branches:\nInfluence.\nScience.\nBacon's seminal work \"Novum Organum\" was influential in the 1630s and 1650s among scholars, in particular Sir Thomas Browne, who in his encyclopedia \"Pseudodoxia Epidemica\" (1646\u201372) frequently adheres to a Baconian approach to his scientific enquiries. This book entails the basis of the Scientific Method as a means of observation and induction.\nAccording to Francis Bacon, learning and knowledge all derive from the basis of inductive reasoning. Through his belief of experimental encounters, he theorized that all the knowledge that was necessary to fully understand a concept could be attained using induction. In order to get to the point of an inductive conclusion, one must consider the importance of observing the particulars (specific parts of nature). \"Once these particulars have been gathered together, the interpretation of Nature proceeds by sorting them into a formal arrangement so that they may be presented to the understanding.\" Experimentation is essential to discovering the truths of Nature. When an experiment happens, parts of the tested hypothesis are started to be pieced together, forming a result and conclusion. Through this conclusion of particulars, an understanding of Nature can be formed. Now that an understanding of Nature has been arrived at, an inductive conclusion can be drawn. \"For no one successfully investigates the nature of a thing in the thing itself; the inquiry must be enlarged to things that have more in common with it.\"\nFrancis Bacon explains how we come to this understanding and knowledge because of this process in comprehending the complexities of nature. \"Bacon sees nature as an extremely subtle complexity, which affords all the energy of the natural philosopher to disclose her secrets.\" Bacon described the evidence and proof revealed through taking a specific example from nature and expanding that example into a general, substantial claim of nature. Once we understand the particulars in nature, we can learn more about it and become surer of things occurring in nature, gaining knowledge and obtaining new information all the while. \"It is nothing less than a revival of Bacon\u2019s supremely confident belief that inductive methods can provide us with ultimate and infallible answers concerning the laws and nature of the universe.\" Bacon states that when we come to understand parts of nature, we can eventually understand nature better as a whole because of induction. Because of this, Bacon concludes that all learning and knowledge must be drawn from inductive reasoning.\nDuring the Restoration, Bacon was commonly invoked as a guiding spirit of the Royal Society founded under Charles II in 1660. During the 18th-century French Enlightenment, Bacon's non-metaphysical approach to science became more influential than the dualism of his French contemporary Descartes, and was associated with criticism of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\". In 1733 Voltaire introduced him to a French audience as the \"father\" of the scientific method, an understanding which had become widespread by the 1750s. In the 19th century his emphasis on induction was revived and developed by William Whewell, among others. He has been reputed as the \"Father of Experimental Philosophy\".\nHe also wrote a long treatise on Medicine, \"History of Life and Death\", with natural and experimental observations for the prolongation of life.\nOne of his biographers, the historian William Hepworth Dixon, states: \"Bacon's influence in the modern world is so great that every man who rides in a train, sends a telegram, follows a steam plough, sits in an easy chair, crosses the channel or the Atlantic, eats a good dinner, enjoys a beautiful garden, or undergoes a painless surgical operation, owes him something.\"\nIn 1902 Hugo von Hofmannsthal published a fictional letter, known as \"The Lord Chandos Letter\", addressed to Bacon and dated 1603, about a writer who is experiencing a crisis of language.\nAlthough Bacon\u2019s works are extremely instrumental, his argument falls short because observation and the scientific method are not completely necessary for everything. Bacon takes the inductive method too far, as seen through one of his aphorisms which says, \"Man, being the servant and interpreter of Nature, can do and understand so much only as he has observed in fact or in thought of the course of nature: Beyond this he neither knows anything nor can do anything.\" As humans, we are capable of more than pure observation and can use deduction to form theories. In fact, we must use deduction because Bacon\u2019s pure inductive method is incomplete. Thus, it is not Bacon\u2019s ideas alone that form the scientific method we use today. If that were the case, we would not be able to fully understand the observations we make and deduce new theories. Author Ernst Mayr states, \"Inductivism had a great vogue in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, but it is now clear that a purely inductive approach is quite sterile.\" Mayr points out that an inductive approach on its own just doesn\u2019t work. One could observe an experiment multiple times, but still be unable to make generalizations and correctly understand the knowledge. Bacon\u2019s inductive method is beneficial, but incomplete and leaves gaps.\nHowever, when combined with the ideas of Descartes, the gaps are filled in Bacon\u2019s inductive method. The \"anticipation of nature\" as Bacon puts it, connects the information gained from observation, enabling hypotheses and theories to become more effective. Bacon\u2019s inductive ideas now have more value. Jurgen Klein, who researched Bacon and analyzed his works, says, \"The inductive method helps the human mind to find a way to ascertain truthful knowledge.\" Klein shows the value that Bacon\u2019s method truly brings. It is not a value that stands on its own, for it has holes, but it is a value that supports and strengthens. The inductive method can be seen as a tool used alongside other ideas, such as deduction, which now creates a method which is most effective and used today: the scientific method. The inductive method is more prominent in the scientific method than other ideas, which leads to misconception, but the takeaway is that it has supporting ideas. Francis Bacon\u2019s scientific method is extremely influential, but has been developed for its own good, as all great ideas are.\nNorth America.\nBacon played a leading role in establishing the British colonies in North America, especially in Virginia, the Carolinas and Newfoundland in northeastern Canada. His government report on \"The Virginia Colony\" was submitted in 1609. In 1610 Bacon and his associates received a charter from the king to form \"the Tresurer and the Companye of Adventurers and planter of the Cittye of London and Bristoll for the Collonye or plantacon in Newfoundland\", and sent John Guy to found a colony there. Thomas Jefferson, the third President of the United States, wrote: \"Bacon, Locke and Newton. I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences\".\nIn 1910 Newfoundland issued a postage stamp to commemorate Bacon's role in establishing the colony. The stamp describes Bacon as \"the guiding spirit in Colonization Schemes in 1610\". Moreover, some scholars believe he was largely responsible for the drafting, in 1609 and 1612, of two charters of government for the Virginia Colony. William Hepworth Dixon considered that Bacon's name could be included in the list of Founders of the United States.\nLaw.\nAlthough few of his proposals for law reform were adopted during his lifetime, Bacon's legal legacy was considered by the magazine \"New Scientist\" in 1961 as having influenced the drafting of the Napoleonic Code as well as the law reforms introduced by 19th-century British Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel. The historian William Hepworth Dixon referred to the Napoleonic Code as \"the sole embodiment of Bacon's thought\", saying that Bacon's legal work \"has had more success abroad than it has found at home\", and that in France \"it has blossomed and come into fruit\".\nHarvey Wheeler attributed to Bacon, in \"Francis Bacon's Verulamium\u2014the Common Law Template of The Modern in English Science and Culture\", the creation of these distinguishing features of the modern common law system:\nAs late as the 18th century some juries still declared the law rather than the facts, but already before the end of the 17th century Sir Matthew Hale explained modern common law adjudication procedure and acknowledged Bacon as the inventor of the process of discovering unwritten laws from the evidences of their applications. The method combined empiricism and inductivism in a new way that was to imprint its signature on many of the distinctive features of modern English society. Paul H. Kocher writes that Bacon is considered by some jurists to be the father of modern Jurisprudence.\nBacon is commemorated with a statue in Gray's Inn, South Square in London where he received his legal training, and where he was elected Treasurer of the Inn in 1608.\nMore recent scholarship on Bacon's jurisprudence has focused on his advocating torture as a legal recourse for the crown. Bacon himself was not a stranger to the torture chamber; in his various legal capacities in both Elizabeth I's and James I's reigns, Bacon was listed as a commissioner on five torture warrants. In 1613(?), in a letter addressed to King James I on the question of torture's place within English law, Bacon identifies the scope of torture as a means to further the investigation of threats to the state: \"In the cases of treasons, torture is used for discovery, and not for evidence.\" For Bacon, torture was not a punitive measure, an intended form of state repression, but instead offered a modus operandi for the government agent tasked with uncovering acts of treason.\nOrganization of knowledge.\nFrancis Bacon developed the idea that a classification of knowledge must be universal while handling all possible resources. In his progressive view, humanity would be better if the access to educational resources were provided to the public, hence the need to organise it. His approach to learning reshaped the Western view of knowledge theory from an individual to a social interest.\nThe original classification proposed by Bacon organised all types of knowledge in three general groups: history, poetry, and philosophy. He did that based on his understanding of how information is processed: memory, imagination, and reason, respectively. His methodical approach to the categorization of knowledge goes hand-in-hand with his principles of scientific methods. Bacon\u2019s writings were the starting point for William Torrey Harris's classification system for libraries in the United States by the second half of the 1800s.\nThe phrase \" (or \"), meaning \"knowledge is power\", is commonly attributed to Bacon: the expression \"\" (\"knowledge itself is power\") occurs in his \"Meditationes Sacrae\" (1597).\nHistorical debates.\nBacon and Shakespeare.\nThe Baconian hypothesis of Shakespearean authorship, first proposed in the mid-19th century, contends that Francis Bacon wrote some or even all of the plays conventionally attributed to William Shakespeare.\nOccult theories.\nFrancis Bacon often gathered with the men at Gray's Inn to discuss politics and philosophy, and to try out various theatrical scenes that he admitted writing. Bacon's alleged connection to the Rosicrucians and the Freemasons has been widely discussed by authors and scholars in many books. However, others, including Daphne du Maurier in her biography of Bacon, have argued that there is no substantive evidence to support claims of involvement with the Rosicrucians. Frances Yates does not make the claim that Bacon was a Rosicrucian, but presents evidence that he was nevertheless involved in some of the more closed intellectual movements of his day. She argues that Bacon's movement for the advancement of learning was closely connected with the German Rosicrucian movement, while Bacon's \"New Atlantis\" portrays a land ruled by Rosicrucians. He apparently saw his own movement for the advancement of learning to be in conformity with Rosicrucian ideals.\nThe link between Bacon's work and the Rosicrucians' ideals which Yates allegedly found was the conformity of the purposes expressed by the Rosicrucian Manifestos and Bacon's plan of a \"Great Instauration\", for the two were calling for a reformation of both \"divine and human understanding\", as well as both had in view the purpose of mankind's return to the \"state before the Fall\".\nAnother major link is said to be the resemblance between Bacon's \"New Atlantis\" and the German Rosicrucian Johann Valentin Andreae's \"Description of the Republic of Christianopolis\" (1619). Andreae describes a utopic island in which Christian theosophy and applied science ruled, and in which the spiritual fulfilment and intellectual activity constituted the primary goals of each individual, the scientific pursuits being the highest intellectual calling\u2014linked to the achievement of spiritual perfection. Andreae's island also depicts a great advancement in technology, with many industries separated in different zones which supplied the population's needs\u2014which shows great resemblance to Bacon's scientific methods and purposes.\nWhile rejecting occult conspiracy theories surrounding Bacon and the claim Bacon personally identified as a Rosicrucian, intellectual historian Paolo Rossi has argued for an occult influence on Bacon's scientific and religious writing. He argues that Bacon was familiar with early modern alchemical texts and that Bacon's ideas about the application of science had roots in Renaissance magical ideas about science and magic facilitating humanity's domination of nature. Rossi further interprets Bacon's search for hidden meanings in myth and fables in such texts as \"The Wisdom of the Ancients\" as succeeding earlier occultist and Neoplatonic attempts to locate hidden wisdom in pre-Christian myths. As indicated by the title of his study, however, Rossi claims Bacon ultimately rejected the philosophical foundations of occultism as he came to develop a form of modern science.\nRossi's analysis and claims have been extended by Jason Josephson-Storm in his study, \"The Myth of Disenchantment\". Josephson-Storm also rejects conspiracy theories surrounding Bacon and does not make the claim that Bacon was an active Rosicrucian. However, he argues that Bacon's \"rejection\" of magic actually constituted an attempt to purify magic of Catholic, demonic, and esoteric influences and to establish magic as a field of study and application paralleling Bacon's vision of science. Furthermore, Josephson-Storm argues that Bacon drew on magical ideas when developing his experimental method. Josephson-Storm finds evidence that Bacon considered nature a living entity, populated by spirits, and argues Bacon's views on the human domination and application of nature actually depend on his spiritualism and personification of nature.\nThe Rosicrucian organization AMORC claims that Bacon was the \"Imperator\" (leader) of the Rosicrucian Order in both England and the European continent, and would have directed it during his lifetime.\nBacon's influence can also be seen on a variety of religious and spiritual authors, and on groups that have utilized his writings in their own belief systems.\nBibliography.\nSome of the more notable works by Bacon are:\nReferences.\nAttribution\nExternal links.\n \n \n "}
{"id": "11322", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11322", "title": "February 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "11323", "revid": "40030878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11323", "title": "February 3", "text": ""}
{"id": "11324", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11324", "title": "Free On-line Dictionary of Computing", "text": "The Free On-line Dictionary of Computing (FOLDOC) is an online, searchable, encyclopedic dictionary of computing subjects.\nHistory.\nFOLDOC was founded in 1985 by Denis Howe and was hosted by Imperial College London. In May 2015, the site was updated to state that it was \"no longer supported by Imperial College Department of Computing\". Howe has served as the editor-in-chief since the dictionary's inception, with visitors to the website able to make suggestions for additions or corrections to articles.\nOpen sourcing.\nThe dictionary incorporates the text of other free resources, such as the Jargon File, as well as covering many other computing-related topics. Due to its availability under the GNU Free Documentation License, a copyleft license, it has in turn been incorporated in whole or part into other free content projects, such as Wikipedia."}
{"id": "11342", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11342", "title": "FOLDOC", "text": ""}
{"id": "11343", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11343", "title": "Foldoc", "text": ""}
{"id": "11344", "revid": "50861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11344", "title": "First-order predicate", "text": "In mathematical logic, a first-order predicate is a predicate that takes only individual(s) constants or variables as argument(s). Compare second-order predicate and higher-order predicate.\nThis is not to be confused with a one-place predicate or monad, which is a predicate that takes only one argument. For example the expression \"is a planet\" is a one-place predicate, while the expression \"is father of\" is a two-place predicate."}
{"id": "11345", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11345", "title": "Snap (gridiron football)", "text": "A snap (colloquially called a \"hike\", \"snapback\", or \"pass from center\") is the backwards passing of the ball in gridiron football at the start of play from scrimmage.\nAction.\nThe ball begins on the ground with its long axis parallel to the sidelines of the field, its ends marking each team's line of scrimmage in American football; in Canadian football, the line of scrimmage of the team without the ball is 1 yard past their side of the ball. The player snapping the ball (known officially as the \"snapper\" in rule books) delivers the ball to another player, and that action is the snap. The snapper may hand, throw, or even roll the ball to the other player. The snap must be a quick and continuous movement of the ball by one or both hands of the snapper, and the ball must leave the snapper's hands. The various rules codes have additional requirements, all of which have the effect of requiring the ball to go back to a player behind the line of scrimmage (i.e. in the \"backfield\"). The snapper almost always passes the ball between his legs, but only in Canadian football is that required.\nIn the standard gridiron football formation, the center/centre is the snapper and is situated in the middle of the line of scrimmage. Only in arena football is the center required by rule to be the snapper. In other codes, a guard, tackle, tight end or split end can legally deliver the snap; such scenarios, known as an \"unbalanced line\", are seldom used outside of trick plays and novelties.\nFor a handed snap, the snapper will usually have his head up, facing opponents. For a thrown snap, especially in formations wherein the ball may be snapped to players in different positions, the snapper will commonly bend over looking between his legs. Because of the vulnerability of a player in such a position, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and the National Federation of State High School Associations (\"Fed\") have adopted rules providing that if a player is positioned at least 7 yards behind the neutral zone to receive a snap, opponents are not to deliberately contact the snapper until one second after the snap (NCAA), or until the snapper has a chance to react (Fed). However, in professional football it is common for a center to be able to practice a single \"shotgun\" formation thrown snap enough to keep his head up and toss it blindly.\nA snap is considered a backwards pass, therefore if the ball is snapped and it hits the ground without any player gaining control of the ball the play is ruled as a fumble.\nSnap count.\nThe team entitled to snap the ball will usually know in advance the moment when the snap is to occur as one of their players calls out signals, which usually include a loud sound such as \"hut\" voiced one or more times, the number of which they know; they are thus said to know the \"snap count\". Therefore, they have a considerable advantage over their opponents. The Center is not, however, allowed to make motions simulating part of the snap-action; therefore their opponents can be confident the first motion of the ball or the Center's hands is the beginning of the snap.\nThe snap count is decided on in the huddle, usually expressed as \"...on &lt;number&gt;.\" being the final words spoken by the quarterback after calling the play but before the huddle breaks and the players go to the line of scrimmage. The snap count allows offensive players to have a small head start. The defensive players want to predict the snap, and build up speed such that they cross the line of scrimmage exactly as the play begins, to increase their chances of getting a tackle for a loss or a sack. By varying the snap count, a quarterback forces the defensive players to react to the movement of the offensive players, or risk being called for an offsides or encroachment penalty. Unfortunately for the offense, this advantage can sometimes become a disadvantage. When faced with an exceptionally loud stadium, players may be unable to hear the snap count and are forced to concentrate more on visual cues (silent snap count or a hard count), or risk false start penalties.\nThe offense must also be mindful of the play clock. If they fail to snap the ball in time they incur a delay of game penalty. Also, with a dwindling play clock, the defense has better chances of guessing when the ball will be snapped. It is easier to predict when the ball will be snapped with 2 seconds left on the play clock, rather than 5 seconds.\nThe defensive team is not allowed to simulate, by calling out numbers, the offense's snap count. Successfully simulating the count would cause members of the offensive team to act too early ruining co-ordination of the play and inviting penalties. Current rules, unlike earlier rules, position officials so far from the line of scrimmage for 50 minutes of the 60-minute game that it is extremely difficult to hear if the defense is simulating the count.\nHistory and rationale.\nThe snap, the set scrum and ruck in today's rugby union, and the play-the-ball in rugby league have common origins in rugby football. As the rules of rugby's scrimmage were written when the game came to North America, they had a significant flaw which was corrected by custom elsewhere, but by the invention of the snap-in American football.\nThe rule adopted by a committee for American football in 1880 first provided for the uncontested right of one side to play the ball by foot (in any direction) for a scrimmage. A certain use of the foot on the ball which had the same effect as heeling it back was known as a \"snap\". Later in the 19th Century, the option of snapping the ball back by hand was added. The option to play the ball with the foot was preserved, however, for several decades, although by early in the 20th Century it was restricted to kicking the ball forward. The kick forward in scrimmage was a surprise play that did not work against a prepared defense. Also for several decades alternatives to the scrimmage for playing the ball from across the sideline after it had gone out of bounds\u2014a throw-in or \"fair\", and \"bounding in\"\u2014existed. Until well into the 20th Century, rather than an official readying the ball for scrimmage, the side entitled to the snap had complete custody of the ball and could snap it from the required spot at any time; for instance, a tackled ball carrier might feign injury, then suddenly snap the ball while recumbent, there being no stance requirement yet. The neutral zone and the right of the Center not to be contacted by an opponent before the snap also was not an original feature. As the 20th Century drew to a close, the NCAA and National Federation of State High School Associations extended that protection to some time after the snap, in cases where a player is positioned at least 7 yards deep to receive a thrown snap.\nCanadian football used the rugby scrimmage unaltered until near the end of the 19th Century, when, regionally at first, under the influence of the American scrimmage, the number of players in the scrimmage was limited to three\u2014a \"centre scrimmager\" bound on either side by props called \"side scrimmagers\". The centre scrimmager was later renamed the \"snap\", and in intercollegiate play one side was given the right to put foot to ball first. Beginning regionally again and universally by 1923, the Burnside rules led to the 3-man scrimmage being reduced to the centre alone, the number of players on the field being reduced commensurately from 14 to 12, and a snap rule and neutral zone similar to that of American football was adopted. In addition to the between-the-legs requirement noted above, for several years after the adoption of the hand snap, a hand-to-hand snap was illegal, the ball required to be thrown instead, in Canadian football. (Though it was technically legal, the hand-to-hand snap was not used on the American side of the border until the 1930s.) Apparently, a complete break was desired from system of backheeling, and the T formation having gone into eclipse in American football at the time, the Canadian snap was modeled on the formations then in common use in the US, such as the single wing.\nThe game design rationale for requiring the snap to be a quick and continuous motion to the backfield is to eliminate the need for rules provisions for a live ball in scrimmage. In Rugby Union the ball may be retained by the forwards and played for a time via the foot in a scrummage (which Rugby League has as well) or ruck, or by the hands in a maul, necessitating additional restrictions on play and player positioning during those intervals. In American and Canadian football, the ball as it is put in play is only held in the line (by the Center) for a fraction of a second. The uncontested possession also, as Walter Camp pointed out, allows for better offensive and defensive planning by the side entitled to snap the ball and their opposition, respectively. A muffed snap can be recovered by either team."}
{"id": "11346", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11346", "title": "Firewire (disambiguation)", "text": "FireWire is Apple's trademark for the IEEE 1394 interface.\nFirewire or Fire wire may also refer to:"}
{"id": "11347", "revid": "545027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11347", "title": "FIFO (computing and electronics)", "text": "In computing and in systems theory, FIFO (an acronym for first in, first out) is a method for organising the manipulation of a data structure (often, specifically a data buffer) where the oldest (first) entry, or 'head' of the queue, is processed first.\nSuch processing is analogous to servicing people in a queue area on a first-come, first-served basis, in the same sequence in which they had arrived at the queue's tail.\nFCFS is also the jargon term for the FIFO operating system scheduling algorithm, which gives every process central processing unit (CPU) time in the order in which it is demanded. FIFO's opposite is LIFO, last-in-first-out, where the youngest entry or 'top of the stack' is processed first. A priority queue is neither FIFO or LIFO but may adopt similar behaviour temporarily or by default. Queueing theory encompasses these methods for processing data structures, as well as interactions between strict-FIFO queues.\nComputer science.\nDepending on the application, a FIFO could be implemented as a hardware shift register, or using different memory structures, typically a circular buffer or a kind of list. For information on the abstract data structure, see Queue (data structure). Most software implementations of a FIFO queue are not thread safe and require a locking mechanism to verify the data structure chain is being manipulated by only one thread at a time.\nThe following code shows a linked list FIFO C++ language implementation. In practice, a number of list implementations exist, including popular Unix systems C sys/queue.h macros or the C++ standard library std::list template, avoiding the need for implementing the data structure from scratch.\nIn computing environments that support the pipes and filters model for interprocess communication, a FIFO is another name for a named pipe.\nDisk controllers can use the FIFO as a disk scheduling algorithm to determine the order in which to service disk I/O requests.\nCommunication network bridges, switches and routers used in computer networks use FIFOs to hold data packets in route to their next destination. Typically at least one FIFO structure is used per network connection. Some devices feature multiple FIFOs for simultaneously and independently queuing different types of information.\nElectronics.\nFIFOs are commonly used in electronic circuits for buffering and flow control between hardware and software. In its hardware form, a FIFO primarily consists of a set of read and write pointers, storage and control logic. Storage may be static random access memory (SRAM), flip-flops, latches or any other suitable form of storage. For FIFOs of non-trivial size, a dual-port SRAM is usually used, where one port is dedicated to writing and the other to reading.\nA synchronous FIFO is a FIFO where the same clock is used for both reading and writing. An asynchronous FIFO uses different clocks for reading and writing. Asynchronous FIFOs introduce metastability issues.\nA common implementation of an asynchronous FIFO uses a Gray code (or any unit distance code) for the read and write pointers to ensure reliable flag generation. One further note concerning flag generation is that one must necessarily use pointer arithmetic to generate flags for asynchronous FIFO implementations. Conversely, one may use either a \"leaky bucket\" approach or pointer arithmetic to generate flags in synchronous FIFO implementations.\nExamples of FIFO status flags include: full, empty, almost full, almost empty, etc.\nThe first known FIFO implemented in electronics was by Peter Alfke in 1969 at Fairchild Semiconductors. Peter Alfke was later a director at Xilinx.\nA hardware FIFO is used for synchronization purposes. It is often implemented as a circular queue, and thus has two pointers:\nRead and write addresses are initially both at the first memory location and the FIFO queue is \"empty\".\nIn both cases, the read and write addresses end up being equal. To distinguish between the two situations, a simple and robust solution is to add one extra bit for each read and write address which is inverted each time the address wraps. With this set up, the disambiguation conditions are:"}
{"id": "11350", "revid": "31984018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11350", "title": "Firewall (construction)", "text": "A firewall is a fire-resistant barrier used to prevent the spread of fire. Firewalls are built between or through buildings, structures, or electrical substation transformers, or within an aircraft or vehicle.\nApplications.\nFirewalls can be used to subdivide a building into separate fire areas and are constructed in accordance with the locally applicable building codes. Firewalls are a portion of a building's passive fire protection systems.\nFirewalls can be used to separate-high value transformers at an electrical substation in the event of a mineral oil tank rupture and ignition. The firewall serves as a fire containment wall between one oil-filled transformer and other neighboring transformers, building structures, and site equipment.\nTypes.\nThere are three main classifications of \"fire rated walls\": fire walls, fire barriers, and fire partitions. To the layperson, the common use of language typically includes all three when referring to a \"firewall\" unless distinguishing between them becomes necessary. In addition specialty fire-rated walls such as a High Challenge Fire Wall would require further distinctions.\nFire barrier walls are typically continuous from an exterior wall to an exterior wall, or from a floor below to a floor or roof above, or from one fire barrier wall to another fire barrier wall, having a fire resistance rating equal to or greater than the required rating for the application. Fire barriers are continuous through concealed spaces (e.g., above a ceiling) to the floor deck or roof deck above the barrier. Fire partitions are not required to extend through concealed spaces if the construction assembly forming the bottom of the concealed space, such as the ceiling, has a fire resistance rating at least equal to or greater than the fire partition.\nPortions of structures that are subdivided by fire walls are permitted to be considered separate buildings, in that fire walls have sufficient structural stability to maintain the integrity of the wall in the event of the collapse of the building construction on either side of the wall.\nPerformance based design.\nFirewalls are used in varied applications that require specific design and performance specifications. Knowing the potential conditions that may exist during a fire are critical to selecting and installing an effective firewall. For example, a firewall designed to meet National Fire Protection Agency, (NFPA), 221-09 section A.5.7 which indicates an average temperature of , is not designed to withstand higher temperatures such as would be present in higher challenge fires, and as a result would fail to function for the expected duration of the listed wall rating.\nPerformance based design takes into account the potential conditions during a fire. Understanding thermal limitations of materials is essential to using the correct material for the application. Laboratory testing is used to simulate fire scenarios and wall loading conditions. The testing results in an assigned listing number for the fire-rated assembly that defines the expected fire resistance duration and wall structural integrity under the tested conditions. Designers may elect to specify a listed fire wall assembly or design a wall system that would require performance testing to certify the expected protections before use of the designed fire-rated wall system.\nFirewalls in vehicles.\nFirewalls are also regularly found in aircraft and in specially prepared cars for compartmentalisation and competition use. For example, a typical conversion of a production car for rallying will include a metal firewall which seals the fuel tank off from the interior of the vehicle. In the event of an accident, resulting in fuel spillage, the firewall can prevent burning fuel from entering the passenger compartment, where it could cause serious injury or death. In regular stock cars, the firewall separates the engine compartment from the cabin and can, at times, contain fibreglass insulation. Automotive firewalls have to be fitted so that they form a complete seal. Usually this is done by bonding the sheet metal to the bodywork using fibreglass resin.\nThe term firewall is also commonly used in American English to refer to the barrier between the passenger and engine compartments of a vehicle. The inner and outer surfaces of the firewall are often coated with noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) absorber to prevent most engine noise from reaching the passenger compartment. In British English, the term for this barrier is bulkhead.\nHigh-voltage transformer fire barriers.\nFire barriers are used around large electrical transformers as firewalls. \nThese barriers are used to isolate one transformer in case of fire or explosions, preventing fire propagation to neighboring transformers.\nThis could cause a domino effect and affect the surrounding electric grid, particularly during peak times. \nUnlike most fire barriers, transformer fire barriers are often expected to not only defeat fire and heat, but also ballistics, explosions and fragmentation."}
{"id": "11351", "revid": "2810812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11351", "title": "Feudal system", "text": ""}
{"id": "11352", "revid": "758927262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11352", "title": "Fenrir (disambiguation)", "text": "Fenrir, Fenrisulfr or Fenris is a Norse mythological wolf. It may also refer to:"}
