{"id": "4620", "revid": "88026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4620", "title": "Bronze Age", "text": " \nThe Bronze Age is a prehistoric period that was characterized by the use of bronze, in some areas proto-writing, and other early features of urban civilization. The Bronze Age is the second principal period of the three-age Stone-Bronze-Iron system, as proposed in modern times by Christian J\u00fcrgensen Thomsen, for classifying and studying ancient societies.\nAn ancient civilization is defined to be in the Bronze Age either by producing bronze by smelting its own copper and alloying with tin, arsenic, or other metals, or by trading for bronze from production areas elsewhere. Bronze is harder and more durable than other metals available at the time, allowing Bronze Age civilizations to gain a technological advantage.\nWhile terrestrial iron is naturally abundant, its high melting point of 1538\u00b0C (2800\u00b0F) placed it out of reach of common use until the end of the second millennium BC. Tin's low melting point of 231.9\u00b0C (449.4\u00b0F) and copper's relatively moderate melting point of 1,085\u00b0C (1,985\u00b0F) placed them within the capabilities of the Neolithic pottery kilns, which date back to 6,000\u00a0BC and were able to produce temperatures greater than 900\u00b0C (1,652\u00b0F). Copper/tin ores are rare, as reflected in the fact that there were no tin bronzes in Western Asia, before trading in bronze began in the third millennium BC. Worldwide, the Bronze Age generally followed the Neolithic period, with the Chalcolithic serving as a transition.\nBronze Age cultures differed in their development of the first writing. According to archaeological evidence, cultures in Mesopotamia (cuneiform script) and Egypt (hieroglyphs) developed the earliest practical writing systems.\nHistory.\nThe overall period is characterized by widespread use of bronze, though the place and time of the introduction and development of bronze technology were not universally synchronous. Human-made tin bronze technology requires set production techniques. Tin must be mined (mainly as the tin ore cassiterite) and smelted separately, then added to hot copper to make bronze alloy. The Bronze Age was a time of extensive use of metals and of developing trade networks (See \"Tin sources and trade in ancient times\"). A 2013 report suggests that the earliest tin-alloy bronze dates to the mid-5th millennium BC in a Vin\u010da culture site in Plo\u010dnik (Serbia), although this culture is not conventionally considered part of the Bronze Age. The dating of the foil has been disputed.\nNear East.\nWestern Asia and the Near East were the first regions to enter the Bronze Age, which began with the rise of the Mesopotamian civilization of Sumer in the mid 4th millennium BC. Cultures in the ancient Near East (often called one of \"the cradles of civilization\") practiced intensive year-round agriculture, developed writing systems, invented the potter's wheel, created centralized governments (usually in form of hereditary monarchies), written law codes, city-states and nation-states and empires, embarked on advanced architectural projects, introduced social stratification, economic and civil administration, slavery, and practiced organized warfare, medicine and religion. Societies in the region laid the foundations for astronomy, mathematics and astrology.\nAnatolia.\nThe Hittite Empire was established in Hattusa in northern Anatolia from the 18th century BC. In the 14th century BC, the Hittite Kingdom was at its height, encompassing central Anatolia, southwestern Syria as far as Ugarit, and upper Mesopotamia. After 1180 BC, amid general turmoil in the Levant conjectured to have been associated with the sudden arrival of the Sea Peoples, the kingdom disintegrated into several independent \"Neo-Hittite\" city-states, some of which survived until as late as the 8th century BC.\nArzawa in Western Anatolia during the second half of the second millennium BC likely extended along southern Anatolia in a belt that reaches from near the Turkish Lakes Region to the Aegean coast. Arzawa was the western neighbor\u00a0\u2013 sometimes a rival and sometimes a vassal\u00a0\u2013 of the Middle and New Hittite Kingdoms.\nThe Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia that was defeated by the Hittites under an earlier Tudhaliya I, around 1400 BC. Arzawa has been associated with the much more obscure Assuwa generally located to its north. It probably bordered it, and may even be an alternative term for it (at least during some periods).\nEgypt.\nEarly Bronze dynasties.\nIn Ancient Egypt, the Bronze Age begins in the Protodynastic period, BC. The archaic \"Early Bronze Age of Egypt\", known as the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt, immediately follows the unification of Lower and Upper Egypt, . It is generally taken to include the First and Second Dynasties, lasting from the Protodynastic Period of Egypt until about 2686 BC, or the beginning of the Old Kingdom. With the First Dynasty, the capital moved from Abydos to Memphis with a unified Egypt ruled by an Egyptian god-king. Abydos remained the major holy land in the south. The hallmarks of ancient Egyptian civilization, such as art, architecture and many aspects of religion, took shape during the Early Dynastic Period. Memphis in the Early Bronze Age was the largest city of the time.\nThe Old Kingdom of the regional Bronze Age is the name given to the period in the 3rd millennium BC when Egypt attained its first continuous peak of civilization in complexity and achievement \u2013 the first of three \"Kingdom\" periods, which mark the high points of civilization in the lower Nile Valley (the others being Middle Kingdom and the New Kingdom).\nThe First Intermediate Period of Egypt, often described as a \"dark period\" in ancient Egyptian history, spanned about 100 years after the end of the Old Kingdom from about 2181 to 2055 BC. Very little monumental evidence survives from this period, especially from the early part of it. The First Intermediate Period was a dynamic time when the rule of Egypt was roughly divided between two competing for power bases: Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt and Thebes in Upper Egypt. These two kingdoms would eventually come into conflict, with the Theban kings conquering the north, resulting in the reunification of Egypt under a single ruler during the second part of the 11th Dynasty.\nNubia.\nThe Bronze Age in Nubia started as early as 2300 BC. Copper smelting was introduced by Egyptians to the Nubian city of Mero\u00eb, in modern-day Sudan, around 2600 BC. A furnace for bronze casting has been found in Kerma that is dated to 2300\u20131900 BC.\nMiddle Bronze dynasties.\nThe Middle Kingdom of Egypt lasted from 2055 to 1650 BC. During this period, the Osiris funerary cult rose to dominate Egyptian popular religion. The period comprises two phases: the 11th Dynasty, which ruled from Thebes and the 12th and 13th Dynasties centered on el-Lisht. The unified kingdom was previously considered to comprise the 11th and 12th Dynasties, but historians now at least partially consider the 13th Dynasty to belong to the Middle Kingdom.\nDuring the Second Intermediate Period, Ancient Egypt fell into disarray for a second time, between the end of the Middle Kingdom and the start of the New Kingdom. It is best known for the Hyksos, whose reign comprised the 15th and 16th dynasties. The Hyksos first appeared in Egypt during the 11th Dynasty, began their climb to power in the 13th Dynasty, and emerged from the Second Intermediate Period in control of Avaris and the Delta. By the 15th Dynasty, they ruled lower Egypt, and they were expelled at the end of the 17th Dynasty.\nLate Bronze dynasties.\nThe New Kingdom of Egypt, also referred to as the Egyptian Empire, lasted from the 16th to the 11th century BC. The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was Egypt's most prosperous time and marked the peak of Egypt's power. The later New Kingdom, i.e. the 19th and 20th Dynasties (1292\u20131069 BC), is also known as the Ramesside period, after the eleven pharaohs that took the name of Ramesses.\nIranian Plateau.\nElam was a \"pre-Iranian\" ancient civilization located to the east of Mesopotamia. In the Old Elamite period (Middle Bronze Age), Elam consisted of kingdoms on the Iranian Plateau, centered in Anshan, and from the mid-2nd millennium BC, it was centered in Susa in the Khuzestan lowlands. Its culture played a crucial role in the Gutian Empire and especially during the Iranian Achaemenid dynasty that succeeded it.\nThe Oxus civilization was a Bronze Age Central Asian culture dated to and centered on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus). In the Early Bronze Age, the culture of the Kopet Dag oases and Altyndepe developed a proto-urban society. This corresponds to level IV at Namazga-Tepe. Altyndepe was a major center even then. Pottery was wheel-turned. Grapes were grown. The height of this urban development was reached in the Middle Bronze Age , corresponding to level V at Namazga-Depe. This Bronze Age culture is called the Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC).\nThe Kulli culture, similar to those of the Indus Valley Civilisation, was located in southern Balochistan (Gedrosia) . Agriculture was the economic base of these people. At several places, dams were found, providing evidence for a highly developed water management system.\nKonar Sandal is associated with the hypothesized \"Jiroft culture\", a 3rd-millennium-BC culture postulated based on a collection of artifacts confiscated in 2001.\nLevant.\nIn modern scholarship, the chronology of the Bronze Age Levant is divided into Early/Proto Syrian; corresponding to the Early Bronze. Old Syrian; corresponding to the Middle Bronze. Middle Syrian; corresponding to the Late Bronze. The term Neo-Syria is used to designate the early Iron Age.\nThe old Syrian period was dominated by the Eblaite first kingdom, Nagar and the Mariote second kingdom. The Akkadians conquered large areas of the Levant and were followed by the Amorite kingdoms, \u20131600 BC, which arose in Mari, Yamhad, Qatna, Assyria. From the 15th century BC onward, the term Amurru is usually applied to the region extending north of Canaan as far as Kadesh on the Orontes River.\nThe earliest known Ugaritic contact with Egypt (and the first exact dating of Ugaritic civilization) comes from a carnelian bead identified with the Middle Kingdom pharaoh Senusret I, 1971\u20131926 BC. A stela and a statuette from the Egyptian pharaohs Senusret III and Amenemhet III have also been found. However, it is unclear at what time these monuments got to Ugarit. In the Amarna letters, messages from Ugarit BC written by Ammittamru I, Niqmaddu II, and his queen, were discovered. From the 16th to the 13th century BC, Ugarit remained in constant touch with Egypt and Cyprus (named Alashiya).\nThe Mitanni was a loosely organized state in northern Syria and south-east Anatolia from \u20131300 BC. Founded by an Indo-Aryan ruling class that governed a predominantly Hurrian population, Mitanni came to be a regional power after the Hittite destruction of Kassite Babylon created a power vacuum in Mesopotamia. At its beginning, Mitanni's major rival was Egypt under the Thutmosids. However, with the ascent of the Hittite empire, Mitanni and Egypt allied to protect their mutual interests from the threat of Hittite domination. At the height of its power, during the 14th century BC, it had outposts centered on its capital, Washukanni, which archaeologists have located on the headwaters of the Khabur River. Eventually, Mitanni succumbed to Hittite, and later Assyrian attacks, and was reduced to a province of the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nThe Israelites were an ancient Semitic-speaking people of the Ancient Near East who inhabited part of Canaan during the tribal and monarchic periods (15th to 6th centuries BC), and lived in the region in smaller numbers after the fall of the monarchy. The name \"Israel\" first appears BC, at the end of the Late Bronze Age and the very beginning of the Iron Age, on the Merneptah Stele raised by the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah.\nThe Arameans were a Northwest Semitic semi-nomadic and pastoralist people who originated in what is now modern Syria (Biblical Aram) during the Late Bronze Age and the early Iron Age. Large groups migrated to Mesopotamia, where they intermingled with the native Akkadian (Assyrian and Babylonian) population. The Aramaeans never had a unified empire; they were divided into independent kingdoms all across the Near East. After the Bronze Age collapse, their political influence was confined to many Syro-Hittite states, which were entirely absorbed into the Neo-Assyrian Empire by the 8th century BC.\nMesopotamia.\nThe Mesopotamian Bronze Age began about 3500 BC and ended with the Kassite period ( BC \u2013 BC). The usual tripartite division into an Early, Middle and Late Bronze Age is not used. Instead, a division primarily based on art-historical and historical characteristics is more common.\nThe cities of the Ancient Near East housed several tens of thousands of people. Ur, Kish, Isin, Larsa and Nippur in the Middle Bronze Age and Babylon, Calah and Assur in the Late Bronze Age similarly had large populations. The Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132154 BC) became the dominant power in the region, and after its fall the Sumerians enjoyed a renaissance with the Neo-Sumerian Empire. Assyria was extant from as early as the 25th century BC, and became a regional power with the Old Assyrian Empire (\u20131750 BC). The earliest mention of Babylon (then a small administrative town) appears on a tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 23rd century BC. The Amorite dynasty established the city-state of Babylon in the 19th century BC. Over 100 years later, it briefly took over the other city-states and formed the short-lived First Babylonian Empire during what is also called the Old Babylonian Period. Akkad, Assyria, and Babylonia all used the written East Semitic Akkadian language for official use and as a spoken language. By that time, the Sumerian language was no longer spoken, but was still in religious use in Assyria and Babylonia, and would remain so until the 1st century AD. The Akkadian and Sumerian traditions played a major role in later Assyrian and Babylonian culture, even though Babylonia (unlike the more militarily powerful Assyria) itself was founded by non-native Amorites and often ruled by other non-indigenous peoples, such as Kassites, Arameans and Chaldeans, as well as its Assyrian neighbors.\nAsia.\nCentral Asia.\nBactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex.\nThe Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC), also known as the Oxus civilization, was a Bronze Age civilization in Central Asia, dated to c. 2400\u20131600 BC, located in present-day northern Afghanistan, eastern Turkmenistan, southern Uzbekistan and western Tajikistan, centred on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus River). Its sites were discovered and named by the Soviet archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi (1976). Bactria was the Greek name for the area of Bactra (modern Balkh), in what is now northern Afghanistan, and Margiana was the Greek name for the Persian satrapy of Margu\u0161, the capital of which was Merv, in modern-day southeastern Turkmenistan.\nAccording to recent studies the BMAC was not a primary contributor to later South-Asian genetics.\nSeima-Turbino Phenomenon.\nThe Altai Mountains in what is now southern Russia and central Mongolia have been identified as the point of origin of a cultural enigma termed the Seima-Turbino Phenomenon. It is conjectured that changes in climate in this region around 2000 BC and the ensuing ecological, economic and political changes triggered a rapid and massive migration westward into northeast Europe, eastward into China and southward into Vietnam and Thailand\n across a frontier of some 4,000 miles. This migration took place in just five to six generations and led to peoples from Finland in the west to Thailand in the east employing the same metal working technology and, in some areas, horse breeding and riding. It is further conjectured that the same migrations spread the Uralic group of languages across Europe and Asia: some 39 languages of this group are still extant, including Hungarian, Finnish and Estonian. However, recent genetic testings of sites in south Siberia and Kazakhstan (Andronovo horizon) would rather support a spreading of the bronze technology via Indo-European migrations eastwards, as this technology was well known for quite a while in western regions.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nIn China, the earliest bronze artifacts have been found in the Majiayao culture site (between 3100 and 2700 BC).\nThe term \"Bronze Age\" has been transferred to the archaeology of China from that of Western Eurasia, and there is no consensus or universally used convention delimiting the \"Bronze Age\" in the context of Chinese prehistory.\nBy convention, the \"Early Bronze Age\" in China is sometimes taken as equivalent to the \"Shang dynasty\" period of Chinese prehistory (16th to 11th centuries BC), and the \"Later Bronze Age\" as equivalent to the \"Zhou dynasty\" period (11th to 3rd centuries BC, from the 5th century, also dubbed \"Iron Age\"), although there is an argument to be made that the \"Bronze Age\" proper never ended in China, as there is no recognizable transition to an \"Iron Age\". Significantly, together with the jade art that precedes it, bronze was seen as a \"fine\" material for ritual art when compared with iron or stone, stone artifacts only becoming popular for tombs during the Han on probable Indian influence (replacing wooden temple in that instance).\nBronze metallurgy in China originated in what is referred to as the Erlitou () period, which some historians argue places it within the range of dates controlled by the Shang dynasty. Others believe the Erlitou sites belong to the preceding Xia () dynasty. The U.S. National Gallery of Art defines the Chinese Bronze Age as the \"period between about 2000 BC and 771 BC,\" a period that begins with the Erlitou culture and ends abruptly with the disintegration of Western Zhou rule.\nWhile there may be a reason to believe that bronze work developed inside China separately from outside influence, the discovery of Europoid mummies in Xinjiang suggests a possible route of transmission from the West beginning in the early second millennium BC. This is, however, still just speculation since there is a lack of direct evidence. A few human mummies alone cannot provide sufficient explanation of metallurgy transmission. Furthermore, the oldest bronze objects found in China so far were discovered at the Majiayao site in Gansu rather than at Xinjiang\nThe Shang dynasty (also known as the Yin dynasty) of the Yellow River Valley rose to power after the Xia dynasty around 1600 BC. While some direct information about the Shang dynasty comes from Shang-era inscriptions on bronze artifacts, most comes from oracle bones \u2013 turtle shells, cattle scapulae, or other bones \u2013 which bear glyphs that form the first significant corpus of recorded Chinese characters.\nIron has been found from the Zhou dynasty, but its use was minimal. Chinese literature dating to the 6th century BC attests knowledge of iron smelting, yet bronze continues to occupy the seat of significance in the archaeological and historical record for some time after this. Historian W.C. White argues that iron did not supplant bronze \"at any period before the end of the Zhou dynasty (256 BC)\" and that bronze vessels make up the majority of metal vessels through the Later Han period, or to 221 BC.\nThe Chinese bronze artifacts generally are either utilitarian, like spear points or adze heads, or \"ritual bronzes\", which are more elaborate versions in precious materials of everyday vessels, as well as tools and weapons. Examples are the numerous large sacrificial tripods known as dings in Chinese; there are many other distinct shapes. Surviving identified Chinese ritual bronzes tend to be highly decorated, often with the \"taotie\" motif, which involves highly stylized animal faces. These appear in three main motif types: those of demons, of symbolic animals, and abstract symbols. Many large bronzes also bear cast inscriptions that are the great bulk of the surviving body of early Chinese writing and have helped historians and archaeologists piece together the history of China, especially during the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BC).\nThe bronzes of the Western Zhou dynasty document large portions of history not found in the extant texts that were often composed by persons of varying rank and possibly even social class. Further, the medium of cast bronze lends the record they preserve a permanence not enjoyed by manuscripts. These inscriptions can commonly be subdivided into four parts: a reference to the date and place, the naming of the event commemorated, the list of gifts given to the artisan in exchange for the bronze, and a dedication. The relative points of reference these vessels provide have enabled historians to place most of the vessels within a certain time frame of the Western Zhou period, allowing them to trace the evolution of the vessels and the events they record.\nKorea.\nThe beginning of the Bronze Age on the peninsula is around 1000\u2013800 BC. Although the Korean Bronze Age culture derives from the Liaoning and Manchuria, it exhibits unique typology and styles, especially in ritual objects.\nThe Mumun pottery period is named after the Korean name for undecorated or plain cooking and storage vessels that form a large part of the pottery assemblage over the entire length of the period, but especially 850\u2013550 BC. The Mumun period is known for the origins of intensive agriculture and complex societies in both the Korean Peninsula and the Japanese Archipelago.\nThe Middle Mumun pottery period culture of the southern Korean Peninsula gradually adopted bronze production (\u2013600? BC) after a period when Liaoning-style bronze daggers and other bronze artifacts were exchanged as far as the interior part of the Southern Peninsula (\u2013700 BC). The bronze daggers lent prestige and authority to the personages who wielded and were buried with them in high-status megalithic burials at south-coastal centers such as the Igeum-dong site. Bronze was an important element in ceremonies and as for mortuary offerings until 100.\nJapan.\nThe Japanese archipelago saw the introduction of bronze during the beginning of the Early Yayoi period (\u2248300 BC), which saw the introduction of metalworking and agricultural practices brought in by settlers arriving from the continent. Bronze and iron smelting techniques spread to the Japanese archipelago through contact with other ancient East Asian civilizations, particularly immigration and trade from the Korean peninsula and ancient mainland China. Iron was mainly used for agricultural and other tools, whereas ritual and ceremonial artifacts were mainly made of bronze.\nSouth Asia.\nIndus Valley.\nThe Bronze Age on the Indian subcontinent began around 3300 BC with the beginning of the Indus Valley civilization. Inhabitants of the Indus Valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and produced copper, bronze, lead and tin. The Late Harappan culture, which dates from 1900\u20131400 BC, overlapped the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age; thus it is difficult to date this transition accurately. It has been claimed that a 6,000 year old copper amulet manufactured in Mehrgarh in the shape of wheel spoke is the earliest example of lost wax casting in the world.\nSoutheast Asia.\nThailand.\nIn Ban Chiang, Thailand, (Southeast Asia) bronze artifacts have been discovered dating to 2100 BC. However, according to the radiocarbon dating on the human and pig bones in Ban Chiang, some scholars propose that the initial Bronze Age in Ban Chiang was in late 2nd millennium. In Nyaunggan, Burma, bronze tools have been excavated along with ceramics and stone artifacts. Dating is still currently broad (3500\u2013500 BC). Ban Non Wat, excavated by Charles Higham, was a rich site with over 640 graves excavated that gleaned many complex bronze items that may have had social value connected to them.\nBan Chiang, however, is the most thoroughly documented site while having the clearest evidence of metallurgy when it comes to Southeast Asia. With a rough date range of late 3rd millennium BC to the first millennium AD, this site alone has various artifacts such as burial pottery (dating from 2100\u20131700 BC), fragments of Bronze, copper-base bangles, and much more. What's interesting about this site, however, isn't just the old age of the artifacts but the fact that this technology suggested on-site casting from the very beginning. The on-site casting supports the theory that Bronze was first introduced in Southeast Asia as fully developed which therefore shows that Bronze was innovated from a different country. Some scholars believe that the copper-based metallurgy was disseminated from northwest and central China via south and southwest areas such as Guangdong province and Yunnan province and finally into southeast Asia around 1000 BC. Archaeology also suggests that Bronze Age metallurgy may not have been as significant a catalyst in social stratification and warfare in Southeast Asia as in other regions, social distribution shifting away from chiefdom-states to a heterarchical network. Data analyses of sites such as Ban Lum Khao, Ban Na Di, Non-Nok Tha, Khok Phanom Di, and Nong Nor have consistently led researchers to conclude that there was no entrenched hierarchy.\nVietnam.\nDating back to the Neolithic Age, the first bronze drum, called the Dong Son drum, were uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of Northern Vietnam and Southern China. These relate to the prehistoric Dong Son Culture of Vietnam.\nArchaeological research in Northern Vietnam indicates an increase in rates of infectious disease following the advent of metallurgy; skeletal fragments in sites dating to the early and mid-Bronze Age evidence a greater proportion of lesions than in sites of earlier periods. There are a few possible implications of this. One is the increased contact with bacterial and/or fungal pathogens due to increased population density and land clearing/cultivation. The other one is decreased levels of immunocompetence in the Metal age due to changes in the diet caused by agriculture. The last is that there may have been an emergence of infectious disease in the Da But the period that evolved into a more virulent form in the metal period.\nEurope.\nA few examples of named Bronze Age cultures in Europe in roughly relative order.\nBalkans.\nA study in the journal \"Antiquity\" published in 2013 reported the discovery of a tin bronze foil from the Plo\u010dnik archaeological site securely dated to c. 4650 BC as well as 14 other artifacts from Serbia and Bulgaria dated to before 4000 BC has shown that early tin bronze was more common than previously thought, and developed independently in Europe 1500 years before the first tin bronze alloys in the Near East. The production of complex tin bronzes lasted for c. 500 years in the Balkans. The authors reported that evidence for the production of such complex bronzes disappears at the end of the 5th millennium coinciding with the \"collapse of large cultural complexes in north-eastern Bulgaria and Thrace in the late fifth millennium BC\". Tin bronzes using cassiterite tin would be reintroduced to the area again some 1500 years later.\nAegean.\nThe Aegean Bronze Age began around 3200 BC, when civilizations first established a far-ranging trade network. This network imported tin and charcoal to Cyprus, where copper was mined and alloyed with the tin to produce bronze. Bronze objects were then exported far and wide and supported the trade. Isotopic analysis of tin in some Mediterranean bronze artifacts suggests that they may have originated from Great Britain.\nKnowledge of navigation was well developed at this time and reached a peak of skill not exceeded (except perhaps by Polynesian sailors) until 1730 when the invention of the chronometer enabled the precise determination of longitude.\nThe Minoan civilization based in Knossos on the island of Crete appears to have coordinated and defended its Bronze Age trade. Ancient empires valued luxury goods in contrast to staple foods, leading to famine.\nAegean collapse.\nBronze Age collapse theories have described aspects of the end of the Bronze Age in this region. At the end of the Bronze Age in the Aegean region, the Mycenaean administration of the regional trade empire followed the decline of Minoan primacy. Several Minoan client states lost much of their population to famine and/or pestilence. This would indicate that the trade network may have failed, preventing the trade that would previously have relieved such famines and prevented illness caused by malnutrition. It is also known that in this era the breadbasket of the Minoan empire, the area north of the Black Sea, also suddenly lost much of its population, and thus probably some capacity to cultivate crops. Drought and famine in Anatolia may have also led to the Aegean collapse by disrupting trade networks, and therefore preventing the Aegean from accessing bronze and luxury goods.\nThe Aegean collapse has been attributed to the exhaustion of the Cypriot forests causing the end of the bronze trade. These forests are known to have existed into later times, and experiments have shown that charcoal production on the scale necessary for the bronze production of the late Bronze Age would have exhausted them in less than fifty years.\nThe Aegean collapse has also been attributed to the fact that as iron tools became more common, the main justification for the tin trade ended, and that trade network ceased to function as it did formerly. The colonies of the Minoan empire then suffered drought, famine, war, or some combination of those three, and had no access to the distant resources of an empire by which they could easily recover.\nThe Thera eruption occurred BC, north of Crete. Speculation includes that a tsunami from Thera (more commonly known today as Santorini) destroyed Cretan cities. A tsunami may have destroyed the Cretan navy in its home harbor, which then lost crucial naval battles; so that in the LMIB/LMII event ( BC) the cities of Crete burned and the Mycenaean civilization took over Knossos. If the eruption occurred in the late 17th century BC (as most chronologists now think) then its immediate effects belong to the Middle to Late Bronze Age transition, and not to the end of the Late Bronze Age, but it could have triggered the instability that led to the collapse first of Knossos and then of Bronze Age society overall. One such theory highlights the role of Cretan expertise in administering the empire, post\u2014Thera. If this expertise was concentrated in Crete, then the Mycenaeans may have made political and commercial mistakes in administering the Cretan empire.\nArchaeological findings, including some on the island of Thera, suggest that the center of the Minoan civilization at the time of the eruption was actually on Thera rather than on Crete. According to this theory, the catastrophic loss of the political, administrative and economic center due to the eruption, as well as the damage wrought by the tsunami to the coastal towns and villages of Crete precipitated the decline of the Minoans. A weakened political entity with a reduced economic and military capability and fabled riches would have then been more vulnerable to conquest. Indeed, the Santorini eruption is usually dated to BC, while the Mycenaean Greeks first enter the historical record a few decades later, BC. The later Mycenaean assaults on Crete ( BC) and Troy ( BC) would have been a continuation of the steady encroachment of the Greeks upon the weakened Minoan world.\nCentral Europe.\nIn Central Europe, the early Bronze Age Unetice culture (1800\u20131600 BC) includes numerous smaller groups like the Straubing, Adlerberg and Hatvan cultures. Some very rich burials, such as the one located at Leubingen with grave gifts crafted from gold, point to an increase of social stratification already present in the Unetice culture. All in all, cemeteries of this period are rare and of small size. The Unetice culture is followed by the middle Bronze Age (1600\u20131200 BC) Tumulus culture, which is characterised by inhumation burials in tumuli (barrows). In the eastern Hungarian K\u00f6r\u00f6s tributaries, the early Bronze Age first saw the introduction of the Mako culture, followed by the Otomani and Gyulavarsand cultures.\nThe late Bronze Age Urnfield culture (1300\u2013700 BC) is characterized by cremation burials. It includes the Lusatian culture in eastern Germany and Poland (1300\u2013500 BC) that continues into the Iron Age. The Central European Bronze Age is followed by the Iron Age Hallstatt culture (700\u2013450 BC).\nImportant sites include:\nThe Bronze Age in Central Europe has been described in the chronological schema of German prehistorian Paul Reinecke. He described Bronze A1 (Bz A1) period (2300\u20132000 BC: triangular daggers, flat axes, stone wrist-guards, flint arrowheads) and Bronze A2 (Bz A2) period (1950\u20131700 BC: daggers with metal hilt, flanged axes, halberds, pins with perforated spherical heads, solid bracelets) and phases Hallstatt A and B (Ha A and B).\nSouth Europe.\nThe Apennine culture (also called Italian Bronze Age) is a technology complex of central and southern Italy spanning the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age proper. The Camuni were an ancient people of uncertain origin (according to Pliny the Elder, they were Euganei; according to Strabo, they were Rhaetians) who lived in Val Camonica \u2013 in what is now northern Lombardy \u2013 during the Iron Age, although human groups of hunters, shepherds and farmers are known to have lived in the area since the Neolithic.\nLocated in Sardinia and Corsica, the Nuragic civilization lasted from the early Bronze Age (18th century BC) to the 2nd century AD, when the islands were already Romanized. They take their name from the characteristic Nuragic towers, which evolved from the pre-existing megalithic culture, which built dolmens and menhirs. The nuraghe towers are unanimously considered the best-preserved and largest megalithic remains in Europe. Their effective use is still debated: some scholars considered them as monumental tombs, others as Houses of the Giants, other as fortresses, ovens for metal fusion, prisons or, finally, temples for a solar cult. Around the end of the 3rd millennium BC, Sardinia exported towards Sicily a \"Culture\" that built small dolmens, trilithic or polygonal shaped, that served as tombs as it has been ascertained in the Sicilian dolmen of \u201cCava dei Servi\u201d. From this region, they reached Malta island and other countries of Mediterranean basin.\nThe Terramare was an early Indo-European civilization in the area of what is now Pianura Padana (northern Italy) before the arrival of the Celts and in other parts of Europe. They lived in square villages of wooden stilt houses. These villages were built on land, but generally near a stream, with roads that crossed each other at right angles. The whole complex denoted the nature of a fortified settlement. Terramare was widespread in the Pianura Padana (especially along the Panaro river, between Modena and Bologna) and in the rest of Europe. The civilization developed in the Middle and Late Bronze Age, between the 17th and the 13th centuries BC.\nThe Castellieri culture developed in Istria during the Middle Bronze Age. It lasted for more than a millennium, from the 15th century BC until the Roman conquest in the 3rd century BC. It takes its name from the fortified boroughs (\"Castellieri\", Friulian: \"cjastelir\") that characterized the culture.\nThe Canegrate culture developed from the mid-Bronze Age (13th century BC) until the Iron Age in the Pianura Padana, in what are now western Lombardy, eastern Piedmont and Ticino. It takes its name from the township of Canegrate where, in the 20th century, some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects were found. The Canegrate culture migrated from the northwest part of the Alps and descended to Pianura Padana from the Swiss Alps passes and the Ticino.\nThe Golasecca culture developed starting from the late Bronze Age in the Po plain. It takes its name from Golasecca, a locality next to the Ticino where, in the early 19th century, abbot Giovanni Battista Giani excavated its first findings (some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects). Remains of the Golasecca culture span an area of c. 20,000 square kilometers south to the Alps, between the Po, Sesia and Serio rivers, dating from the 9th to the 4th century BC.\nWest Europe.\nAtlantic Bronze Age.\nThe Atlantic Bronze Age is a cultural complex of the period of approximately 1300\u2013700 BC that includes different cultures in Portugal, Andalusia, Galicia, and the British Isles. It is marked by economic and cultural exchange. Commercial contacts extend to Denmark and the Mediterranean. The Atlantic Bronze Age was defined by many distinct regional centers of metal production, unified by a regular maritime exchange of some of their products.\nGreat Britain.\nIn Great Britain, the Bronze Age is considered to have been the period from around 2100 to 750 BC. Migration brought new people to the islands from the continent. Recent tooth enamel isotope research on bodies found in early Bronze Age graves around Stonehenge indicates that at least some of the migrants came from the area of modern Switzerland. Another example site is Must Farm, near Whittlesey, which has recently been host to the most complete Bronze Age wheel ever to be found. The Beaker culture displayed different behaviors from the earlier Neolithic people, and cultural change was significant. Integration is thought to have been peaceful, as many of the early henge sites were seemingly adopted by the newcomers. The rich Wessex culture developed in southern Britain at this time. Additionally, the climate was deteriorating; where once the weather was warm and dry it became much wetter as the Bronze Age continued, forcing the population away from easily defended sites in the hills and into the fertile valleys. Large livestock farms developed in the lowlands and appear to have contributed to economic growth and inspired increasing forest clearances. The Deverel-Rimbury culture began to emerge in the second half of the Middle Bronze Age ( \u20131100 BC) to exploit these conditions. Devon and Cornwall were major sources of tin for much of western Europe and copper was extracted from sites such as the Great Orme mine in northern Wales. Social groups appear to have been tribal but with growing complexity and hierarchies becoming apparent.\nThe burial of the dead (which, until this period, had usually been communal) became more individual. For example, whereas in the Neolithic a large chambered cairn or long barrow housed the dead, Early Bronze Age people buried their dead in individual barrows (also commonly known and marked on modern British Ordnance Survey maps as tumuli), or sometimes in cists covered with cairns.\nThe greatest quantities of bronze objects in England were discovered in East Cambridgeshire, where the most important finds were recovered in Isleham (more than 6500 pieces).\nAlloying of copper with zinc or tin to make brass or bronze was practiced soon after the discovery of copper itself. One copper mine at Great Orme in North Wales, extended to a depth of 70 meters. At Alderley Edge in Cheshire, carbon dates have established mining at around 2280 to 1890 BC (at 95% probability). The earliest identified metalworking site (Sigwells, Somerset) is much later, dated by Globular Urn style pottery to approximately the 12th century BC. The identifiable sherds from over 500 mould fragments included a perfect fit of the hilt of a sword in the Wilburton style held in Somerset County Museum.\nIreland.\nThe Bronze Age in Ireland commenced around 2000 BC when copper was alloyed with tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes and associated metalwork. The preceding period is known as the Copper Age and is characterised by the production of flat axes, daggers, halberds and awls in copper. The period is divided into three phases: Early Bronze Age (2000\u20131500 BC), Middle Bronze Age (1500\u20131200 BC), and Late Bronze Age (1200\u2013 BC). Ireland is also known for a relatively large number of Early Bronze Age burials.\nOne of the characteristic types of artifact of the Early Bronze Age in Ireland is the flat axe. There are five main types of flat axes: Lough Ravel ( BC), Ballybeg ( BC), Killaha ( BC), Ballyvalley (\u20131600 BC), Derryniggin ( BC), and a number of metal ingots in the shape of axes.\nNorth Europe.\nThe Bronze Age in Northern Europe spans the entire 2nd millennium BC (Unetice culture, Urnfield culture, Tumulus culture, Terramare culture, Lusatian culture) lasting until BC. The Northern Bronze Age was both a period and a Bronze Age culture in Scandinavian pre-history, \u2013500 BC, with sites that reached as far east as Estonia. Succeeding the Late Neolithic culture, its ethnic and linguistic affinities are unknown in the absence of written sources. It is followed by the Pre-Roman Iron Age.\nEven though Northern European Bronze Age cultures were relatively late, and came into existence via trade, sites present rich and well-preserved objects made of wool, wood and imported Central European bronze and gold. Many rock carvings depict ships, and the large stone burial monuments known as stone ships suggest that shipping played an important role. Thousands of rock carvings depict ships, most probably representing sewn plank built canoes for warfare, fishing, and trade. These may have a history as far back as the neolithic period and continue into the Pre-Roman Iron Age, as shown by the Hjortspring boat. There are many mounds and rock carving sites from the period. Numerous artifacts of bronze and gold are found. No written language existed in the Nordic countries during the Bronze Age. The rock carvings have been dated through comparison with depicted artifacts.\nCaucasus.\nArsenical bronze artifacts of the Maykop culture in the North Caucasus have been dated around the 4th millennium BC. This innovation resulted in the circulation of arsenical bronze technology over southern and eastern Europe.\nPontic\u2013Caspian steppe.\nThe Yamnaya culture is a Late Copper Age/Early Bronze Age culture of the Southern Bug/Dniester/Ural region (the Pontic steppe), dating to the 36th\u201323rd centuries BC. The name also appears in English as Pit-Grave Culture or Ochre-Grave Culture. The Catacomb culture, \u20132200 BC, comprises several related Early Bronze Age cultures occupying what is presently Russia and Ukraine. The Srubna culture was a Late Bronze Age (18th\u201312th centuries BC) culture. It is a successor to the Yamnaya and the Poltavka culture.\nAfrica.\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nIron and copper smelting appeared around the same time in most parts of Africa. As such, most African civilizations outside of Egypt did not experience a distinct Bronze Age. Evidence for iron smelting appears earlier or at the same time as copper smelting in Nigeria c. 900\u2013800 BC, Rwanda and Burundi c. 700\u2013500 BC and Tanzania c. 300 BC.\nThere is a longstanding debate about whether the development of both copper and iron metallurgy were independently developed in sub-Saharan Africa or were introduced from the outside across the Sahara Desert from North Africa or the Indian Ocean. Evidence for theories of independent development and outside introduction are scarce and subject to active scholarly debate. Scholars have suggested that both the relative dearth of archeological research in sub-Saharan Africa as well as long-standing prejudices have limited or biased our understanding of pre-historic metallurgy on the continent. One scholar characterized the state of historical knowledge as such: \"To say that the history of metallurgy in sub-Saharan Africa is complicated is perhaps an understatement.\"\nWest Africa.\nCopper smelting took place in West Africa prior to the appearance of iron smelting in the region. Evidence for copper smelting furnaces was found near Agadez, Niger that has been dated as early as 2200 BC. However, evidence for copper production in this region before 1000 BC is debated. Evidence of copper mining and smelting has been found at Akjoujt, Mauretania that suggests small scale production to 400 BC.\nAmericas.\nThe Moche civilization of South America independently discovered and developed bronze smelting. Bronze technology was developed further by the Incas and used widely both for utilitarian objects and sculpture. A later appearance of limited bronze smelting in West Mexico suggests either contact of that region with Andean cultures or separate discovery of the technology. The Calchaqu\u00ed people of Northwest Argentina had bronze technology.\nTrade.\nTrade and industry played a major role in the development of the ancient Bronze Age civilizations. With artifacts of the Indus Valley Civilization being found in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt, it is clear that these civilizations were not only in touch with each other but also trading with each other. Early long-distance trade was limited almost exclusively to luxury goods like spices, textiles and precious metals. Not only did this make cities with ample amounts of these products extremely rich but also led to an intermingling of cultures for the first time in history.\nTrade routes were not only over land but also over water. The first and most extensive trade routes were over rivers such as the Nile, the Tigris and the Euphrates which led to growth of cities on the banks of these rivers. The domestication of camels at a later time also helped encourage the use of trade routes over land, linking the Indus Valley with the Mediterranean. This further led to towns sprouting up in numbers anywhere and everywhere there was a pit-stop or caravan-to-ship port."}
{"id": "4621", "revid": "36766212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4621", "title": "BBC News (TV channel)", "text": "BBC News (also known as the BBC News Channel) is a British free-to-air television news channel. It was launched as BBC News 24 on 9 November 1997 at 5:30\u00a0pm as part of the BBC's foray into digital domestic television channels, becoming the first competitor to Sky News, which had been running since 1989. For a time, looped news, sport and weather bulletins were available to view via BBC Red Button.\nOn 22 February 2006, the channel was named \"News Channel of the Year\" at the Royal Television Society Television Journalism Awards for the first time in its history. The judges remarked that this was the year that the channel had \"really come into its own.\" The channel won the accolade for a second time in 2017.\nFrom May 2007, viewers in the UK could watch the channel via the BBC News website. In April 2008, the channel was renamed \"BBC News\" as part of a \u00a3550,000 rebranding of the BBC's news output, complete with a new studio and presentation. Its sister service, BBC World was also renamed \"BBC World News\" while the national news bulletins became \"BBC News at One\", \"BBC News at Six\" and \"BBC News at Ten\". Across the day the channel averages about twice the audience of Sky News.\nThe channel is based at and broadcasts from Broadcasting House in the West End of London.\nHistory.\nBBC News 24 was originally only available on a full-time basis on cable with all other viewers only able to watch the channel overnight when BBC One was not on air. This coverage was improved in 1998 with the advent of digital television in the United Kingdom allowing satellite and digital terrestrial television viewers to also view the service. Initially it was difficult to obtain a digital satellite or terrestrial receiver without a subscription to Sky or ONdigital respectively, but now the channel forms an important part of the Freeview and Freesat channel packages.\nThe BBC had run the international news channel BBC World for two and a half years prior to the launch of BBC News 24 on 9 November 1997. Sky News has had a free hand with domestic news coverage for over eight years (since 5 February 1989) and being owned by News Corporation their papers were used to criticise the BBC for extending its news output.\nSky News objected to the breaking of its monopoly, complaining about the costs associated with running a channel that only a minority could view from the licence fee. Sky News claimed that a number of British cable operators had been incentivised to carry News 24 (which, as a licence-fee funded channel was made available to such operators for free) in preference to the commercial Sky News. However, in September 1999 the European Commission ruled against a complaint made by Sky News that the publicly funded channel was unfair and illegal under EU law. The Commission ruled that the licence fee should be considered state aid but that such aid was justified due to the public service remit of the BBC and that it did not exceed actual costs.\nThe channel's journalistic output has been overseen by Controller of the channel since 16 December 2005. This was a return to having a dedicated Controller for the channel in the same way as the rest of the BBC's domestic television channels. At launch, Tim Orchard was Controller of News 24 from 1997 until 2000. Editorial decisions were then overseen by Rachel Atwell in her capacity as Deputy Head of television news. Her deputy Mark Popescu became responsible for editorial content in 2004, a role he continued in until the appointment of Kevin Bakhurst as Controller in 2005.\nA further announcement by Head of television news Peter Horrocks came at the same time as Bakhurst's appointment in which he outlined his plan to provide more funding and resources for the channel and shift the corporation's emphasis regarding news away from the traditional BBC One bulletins and across to the rolling news channel. The introduction of simulcasts of the main bulletins on the channel was to allow the news bulletins to pool resources rather than work against each other at key times in the face of competition particularly from Sky News.\nOn 1 October 2012 Sam Taylor was appointed Controller of BBC News, along with the BBC News at One. In 2016 the Controller positions of BBC One and BBC Two were scrapped. Sam Taylor continues as Executive Editor of the BBC News Channel and the BBC News at One. One major recent defining feature of BBC News has been the programme 100 Days, later Beyond 100 Days, which Taylor was responsible for creating.\nThe BBC Governors' annual report for 2005/2006 reported that average audience figures for fifteen-minute periods had reached 8.6% in multichannel homes, up from 7.8% in 2004/2005. The 2004 report claimed that the channel outperformed Sky News in both weekly and monthly reach in multichannel homes for the January 2004 period, and for the first time in two years moved ahead of Sky News in being perceived as the channel best for news.\n2008 rebranding.\nOn 21 April 2008, BBC News 24 was renamed \"BBC News\" on the channel itself \u2013 but is referred to as the \"BBC News Channel\" on other BBC services. This is part of the creative futures plan, launched in 2006, to bring all BBC News output under the single brand name.\nThe BBC News Channel moved from the Studio N8 set, which became home to BBC World News, to what was the home of the national news in Studio N6, allowing the channel to share its set with the \"BBC News at One\" and the \"BBC News at Ten\" \u2013 with other bulletins moving to Studio TC7.\nMove to Broadcasting House.\nThe channel relocated, along with the remaining BBC News services at Television Centre, to the newly refurbished Broadcasting House on 18 March 2013 at 13:00 GMT. Presentation and on-screen graphics were refreshed, with new full HD studios and a live newsroom backdrop. Moving cameras in the newsroom form part of the top of the hour title sequence and are used at the start of weather bulletins.\nBBC News HD.\nOn 16 July 2013, the BBC announced that a high-definition (HD) simulcast of BBC News would be launched by early 2014. The channel broadcasts on the BBC's new HD multiplex on Freeview. HD output from BBC News has been simulcast on BBC One HD and BBC Two HD since the move to Broadcasting House in March 2013. The channel launched on 10 December 2013 (at an early date) and rolled-out nationwide up to June 2014 (as did BBC Four HD and CBeebies HD).\nProgramming.\nNews.\nEach weekday daytime hour consists of headlines on each quarter-hour, extended at the top of the hour to form the main part of the daily schedule. Overnight, there is generally a bulletin of 25 minutes length each hour, followed by a weather forecast. A summary airs on the half hour and then there is usually a programme to the weather before the top of the hour. A similar pattern is followed at weekends, with bulletins usually being 30 minutes length. These patterns will often be displaced by rolling news coverage including reports and live interviews. This channel also provides the sports news from the BBC Sport centre at MediaCityUK. At 21:25 a global weather forecast is broadcast and 21:55 \"Weather for the Week Ahead\" is broadcast.\nBreaking news.\nThe BBC maintains guidelines for procedures to be taken for breaking news. With domestic news, the correspondent first recorded a \"generic minute\" summary (for use by all stations and channels) and then priority was to report on BBC Radio 5 Live, then on the BBC News channel and any other programmes that are on air. Since 5 Live's move to Manchester, this has been reversed. For foreign news, first a \"generic minute\" is recorded, then reports are to World Service radio, then the reporter talks to any other programmes that are on air.\nA key claim made by Lord Lambert in his report had been that the channel was slower to react to breaking news compared with its main rival Sky News. To counteract this, a new feature introduced with the 2003 relaunch was a 'breaking news sting': a globe shown briefly onscreen to direct a viewer's attention to the breaking news.\nThe graphics relaunch in January 2007 saw the globe sting replaced by a red strapline to highlight the breaking story immediately.\nTo complement this, a permanent live news ticker had earlier been introduced in 2006: this had previously been in use only sporadically. News statements are shown as continuously scrolling upper-case text located at the bottom of the screen; some past ambiguities noted have included spelling the plural of MPs as \"MPS\", together with other occasional spelling and grammatical errors. The design of this ticker was slightly altered with the 2007 graphics redesign and from June turned red to indicate breaking news, as \"Newswatch\" reported viewers' confusion. The ticker was removed during trails and weather forecasts.\nA new set of graphics, including a change to font style, was officially launched in July 2019 although it was broadcast in error up to a couple of months before. The news ticker, which had been a long-running feature of the Channel, was replaced by a flipper as stories no longer scroll across the screen. The headlines now have a limited length and appear in full in turn. The word \"BREAKING\" may appear on screen and flash to indicate breaking news. Occasionally a breaking news sting may appear on the Channel to call attention to breaking news. This sting gained some notoriety in June 2017 when a technical error caused it to appear several times in a row, delaying the start of the BBC News at Ten. Usually the BBC News Channel crosses over to live events, such as press conferences, without using the sting and the presenter on air introduces what viewers are seeing.\nOvernight and BBC World News simulcasts.\nThe BBC began simulcasting the channel overnight on terrestrial channel BBC One with the launch of the channel, ending the tradition of a closedown but at the same time effectively making the service available to many more viewers. In the early 2000s, BBC Two also started simulcasting the channel, although the weekend morning show \"Weekend 24\" had been simulcast on the channel in the early days. During major breaking news events, the BBC News Channel has been broadcast on BBC One; examples of special broadcasts include the 11 September 2001 attacks, 7 July 2005 London bombings, the capture of Saddam Hussein, and the death of Osama bin Laden. In 2020, shared programming between BBC One and the News Channel has often included the UK Government's Coronavirus Daily Update. This has been broadcast usually during late afternoons when the Government has made announcements.\nCoverage of major events has also been simulcast on BBC World News. Currently, overnight viewers receive 25-minute editions of BBC News every hour, and on weekdays 00:00\u201302:00 receive \"Newsday\", live from Singapore and from London which also includes Asia Business Report and Sport Today between 00:30 and 01:00 and also between 01:30 and 02:00\nFrom 02:00\u201305:00 (00:00\u201306:00 on weekends) receive \"BBC World News\". \"The Briefing\" airs between 05:00\u201306:00 on weekdays.\nThese simulcasts have been changed and expanded as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The BBC has introduced a streamlined schedule and the News Channel and BBC World News now share major parts of evening and weekend coverage. From August this was changed and made permanent to 10:00 to 12:00 and on weekdays 19:00 to 06:00, with opt-outs for BBC News at Ten and half an hour at 20:30, weekends 21:00 to 06:00, apart from the evening BBC One bulletin.\nBBC One, BBC Two and BBC World News simulcasts.\n\"BBC Breakfast\" has been simulcast since launch (in 2000) on BBC One and BBC News, replacing the individual breakfast shows that had run on both channels. Since May 2006 until 17 March 2020, the simulcast generally ran from 06:00 until 08:30 during the week. \"Breakfast\" on BBC One continued from MediaCityUK until 09:15 with entertainment and features, whilst BBC News usually went to BBC Business Live until 09:00 and reverted to its traditional format from 09:00. Since 18 March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused changes to these arrangements. Business Live, which had become Worklife, is no longer on air. Weekdays, Breakfast now runs until 09:00 on both BBC One and the BBC News Channel and there is then an hour of news, now called the BBC News at Nine, on both channels. This continues as the first half of two hours of programming on the BBC News Channel, the second hour usually taken by BBC Two presented by Victoria Derbyshire on Mondays to Wednesdays and generally by Annita McVeigh on the other two days of the week.\nBBC Two often takes the News Channel programming on weekdays from 09:00 until 13:00 also simulcasted on BBC World News, when coverage switches to BBC One in the form of the simulcast BBC News at One. The BBC News at One may be broadcast on BBC One only however during periods of breaking news or major announcements in the House of Commons carried only on the News Channel, if it's an international story coverage will switch for the hour to simulcast with BBC World News. A similar arrangement applies for the BBC News at Six, generally simulcast on both BBC One and the News Channel but, as ever, subject to change for breaking news for the News Channel.\nThe \"BBC News at Ten\" began simulcasting on the channel on 30 January 2006 as part of the \"Ten O'Clock Newshour\", followed by extended sport and business news updates. The bulletin was joined in being simulcast on 10 April 2006 when the \"BBC News at One\" (with British Sign Language in-vision signing) and \"BBC News at Six\" bulletins were added to the schedule following a similar format to the \"News at Ten\" in terms of content on the channel once each simulcast ends.\nDuring the summer, the hour-long programme \"News 24 Sunday\" was broadcast both on BBC One and the BBC News Channel at 09:00, to replace \"The Andrew Marr Show\", which is off air. It was presented by a news presenter, and came from the main News channel studio. The programme was made up mostly of interviews focusing on current affairs, and included a full paper review, a weather summary, and a news update at 09:00, 09:30 and 10:00. \"Sunday Morning Live\" and alternative programming now fill this slot.\nFrom 2013, a new programme was created for BBC Two for 11:00-12:00 weekdays, consisting of 30 minutes domestic and 30 minutes of BBC World News. On Wednesdays, when parliament is sitting the latter is replaced by the Daily Politics for coverage of Prime Minister's Questions. In March 2016 the channel started showing Newsnight at 23:15.\nThe coverage from 10:00 to 13:00 on BBC Two and the News Channel is part of three-hour block of \"BBC World News\" simulcast due to the Coronavirus Pandemic. In turn, BBC World News produces the three-hour block between 19:00 to 22:00 and 22:30 to 06:00 on the channel and most coverage after the BBC News at Ten, including one edition of the Papers, is also shared with BBC World News. From August this was changed and made permanent to 10:00 to 12:00 and on weekdays 19:00 to 06:00, with opt-outs for BBC News at Ten and half an hour at 20:30, weekends 21:00 to 06:00, these exclude BBC One bulletin \nExclusive programmes.\nBranded programming\nOther programmes include:\nPrevious BBC News programming includes \"Head 2 Head\", \"Your News\", \"E24\", \"The Record Europe\", \"STORYFix\" and \"News 24 Tonight\", a weekday evening programme which ran from 2005 to 2008, providing a round up of the day's news. It also now includes Victoria Derbyshire, which ran from 2015, the cancellation of which was announced by the BBC before the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the UK.\n2015 schedule changes.\nAs part of budget cuts, major changes to the channel were announced in late 2014/early 2015. This included axing some bulletins and replacing them with \"Victoria Derbyshire\" and \"BBC Business Live\" with Sally Bundock and Ben Thompson in the morning. \"Outside Source with Ros Atkins\" \u2013 an \"interactive\" show already broadcast on BBC World News \u2013 aired Mondays-Thursday at (During major stories 18:00) and 21:00 and a new edition of \"World News Today\" Friday-Sunday at 21:00 (During major stories 19:00/20:00 Monday-Friday) adding to the 19:00 edition on BBC Four. \"HARDtalk\" was moved to 20:30 in May. The 00:00 edition was replaced on Sundays-Thursday with \"Newsday\" and on Friday-Saturday a standard edition of \"BBC World News\".\nBBC World News shared programming.\nThis has now been expanded by the COVID-19 crisis. For a description, see above under BBC One, BBC Two and BBC World simulcasts. The following operates as a description prior to COVID-19.\nBetween 00:00\u201306:00 UK time, the channel simulcast with its sister channel, BBC World News, for the first 25 minutes of each hour with world news shown all through the simulcasts.\nOn 1 October 2007, BBC World News started broadcasting \"BBC World News America\" and \"World News Today\" at 00:00 and 03:00 GMT respectively. \"World News Today\" was simulcast on the BBC News channel at 03:00 GMT. \"BBC World News America\" used to be aired as a reduced length, time-delayed version at 00:30 GMT, with \"ABC World News Tonight with David Muir\" also being shown at 01:30 every Tuesday-Friday.\nFrom 13 June 2011, the weekday editions of BBC News at 01:00, 02:00, 03:00 and 04:00 were replaced with \"Newsday\". The programme acts as a morning news bulletin for the Asia-Pacific region and is broadcast as a double-headed news bulletin with Rico Hizon in Singapore and Babita Sharma in London. \"Asia Business Report\" and \"Sport Today\" are aired at the back of the first three hours of \"Newsday\". But Newsday changed to 23:00\u201302:00 on BBC News a year later meaning Mike Embley presents Tuesday-Friday \"BBC World News\" 23:00\u201302:00 with Kasia Madera on Saturdays and Daniela Ritorto 00:00\u201306:00 Sunday, 02:00\u201305:00 Friday/Monday.\n\"BBC World News\" and \"World Business Report\" air at 05:00. This was previously known as \"The World Today\", However, since November 2017 this was rebranded as \"The Briefing\" and \"Business Briefing\" on both channels and in lieu of commercials seen on the international broadcasts, the presenters gave a brief update on UK news for domestic audiences.\nIn June 2015, BBC News began simulcasting \"Outside Source with Ros Atkins\" on Mondays-Thursday at (During major stories 18:00) / at 21:00 and a new edition of \"World News Today\" Friday-Sunday at (during major stories Monday-Friday 19:00) 21:00. Since January 2017, they began simulcasting \"Beyond 100 Days\" (previously '100 Days\" and \"100 Days +) Monday to Thursday at 19:00, presented from London and Washington. During August, \"Beyond 100 Days\" is replaced by another edition of \"World News Today\".\nTraditionally, during simulcasts in December, care has been taken to conceal the newsroom Christmas tree for international audiences. From 2015, the 21:00 bulletin has always been an edition of \"World News Today\", replacing \"Outside Source with Ros Atkins\".\nSports.\nSince 5 March 2012, sports bulletins come from the \"BBC Sport Centre\" in MediaCityUK in Salford Quays, where the sports network BBC Radio 5 Live is also based.\nHeadlines are usually provided at 15 minutes past the hour with a full bulletin after the bottom-of-the-hour headlines. There are also extended sports bulletins per day, entitled \"Sportsday\" or \"Sport Today\" (when simulcasting with BBC World News) broadcast at 00:45, 01:45, 02:45, 03:45, 13:30, 18:30, 19:30 (weekends only), 22:30 (weekdays only). Each bulletin is read by a single sports presenter, with the exception of Saturday \"Sportsday\", which is double headed.\nThe channel's sports bulletins (internally known as Sport 24) have always had a separate, dedicated production gallery, which is also responsible for the graphics.\nBulletins during BBC Breakfast are presented by Sally Nugent or Mike Bushell, with the latter also appearing on other sports bulletins on the channel. the main sports presenters on the channel are Olly Foster, Gavin Ramjaun, Katie Gornall, Chetan Pathak, Katherine Downes, Tulsen Tollett, Lizzie Greenwood-Hughes and John Watson.\nUntil March 2012 bulletins came from the News Channel studio at the quarter to the hour. Presenters for bulletins on the channel have included: Reshmin Chowdhury, Amanda Davies, Sean Fletcher, Matt Gooderick, Celina Hinchcliffe, Rachael Hodges, Damian Johnson, Adnan Nawaz and Olympic gold medallist turned journalist Matthew Pinsent.\nBusiness.\nBefore BBC News moved to Broadcasting House, an hourly business update was included during the weekday schedule from the BBC Business Unit. There were two shifts, from 08:30\u201314:00 and 14:00\u201323:00, presented by Penny Haslam, Maryam Moshiri, Ben Thompson, Adam Parsons, Susannah Streeter, Joe Lynam, Sara Coburn or Sally Eden. News Channel updates were usually broadcast at 40 minutes past the hour between 08:00 and 23:00. The 21:40 round-up was often earlier and the 22:40 bulletin is an extended round-up of the day's business news. Until May 2009, the business updates on the BBC News Channel were broadcast from one of the London Stock Exchange's studios in central London. From then until March 2013 the bulletins were provided from the channel's studio at BBC Television Centre. The business updates were axed in March 2013 as part of the BBC's Delivering Quality First plan. But after complaints returned in November 2013.\nStock market updates now only appear during the quarter-to-the-hour headlines. Rachel Horne is the main presenter from 13:30\u201318:00 with Vishala Sri-Pathma, Alice Baxter, Jamie Robertson, Aaron Heslehurst and Sally Bundock. There is normally an extended bulletin at 16:45 when the main business stories of the day are discussed on \"Afternoon Live.\" Bundock and Thompson present \"Business Live\" on weekdays at 08:30. Declan Curry presented \"Your Money\", a weekly round-up on a Saturday morning.\nRico Hizon or Sharanjit Leyl regularly presented the main business stories during the early hours of the morning from Singapore during the BBC's \"Asia Business Report\", which is simulcast from BBC World News. Alice Baxter and Sally Bundock presented \"World Business Report\".\nNews presenters.\nRelief.\nSally Bundock, Alice Baxter and Ben Thompson present \"Business Live\" and \"World Business Report\". Ros Atkins presents 'Outside Source'. Philippa Thomas, Alpa Patel, Karin Giannone or Kasia Madera present \"World News Today\" on Weekdays on BBC Four and weekends on the channel. Rico Hizon and Sharanjit Leyl (Reporting from Singapore), Babita Sharma and Madera are the main overnight presenters on the channel, appearing on \"Newsday\" and generic BBC News bulletins. These programmes are simulcast with BBC World News and either BBC One or BBC Two. Madera, Ben Bland and Mike Embley regularly present 02:00\u201305:00 weekdays and 01:00\u201306:00 weekends. Bundock or David Eades present \"The Briefing\" and \"Business Briefing\" on weekday mornings on the channel and BBC One.\nThe simulcasting of the main national news bulletins has led to the presenters of those bulletins appearing on the channel and offer relief on the news channel including Huw Edwards, Victoria Derbyshire, Fiona Bruce, George Alagiah, Sophie Raworth, Kate Silverton and Mishal Husain. The main \"Breakfast\" presenters have also appeared on the channel since it was first launched as a simulcast programme in 2000, with the current presenters being Dan Walker, Louise Minchin, Charlie Stayt and Naga Munchetty.\nThomas presents the BBC World News programme Reporters on the channel, while Gavin Esler presents \"Dateline London\". Stephen Sackur appears on \"HARDtalk\", which is aired weeknights and at weekends, while Zeinab Badawi, Carrie Gracie and Sarah Montague provide cover for him. Spencer Kelly presents the technology news programme \"Click\". \"Newsnight\" host Evan Davis presents \"The Bottom Line\". Lee McKenzie presents \"Inside F1\" on Grand Prix weekend's. Tanya Beckett presents \"Talking Business\" and \"Witness\". Ade Adepitan, Rajan Datar, Christa Larwood, Henry Golding and Carmen Robert present \"The Travel Show\"\nDuring a major news event one or more of the main news presenters may be sent to present live for the channel from the scene of the story, where they will conduct interviews with the people involved, question correspondents, introduce related reports and also give general information on the story, much as a reporter sent to cover a story would. The presenters often have expertise in the story they are sent to cover, for example channel presenters and former reporters Ben Brown and Clive Myrie were dispatched to Cairo and Tripoli during the Middle East uprisings.\nPresentation.\nGraphics.\nThe channel was criticised at launch for its style of presentation, with accusations of it being less authoritative than the BBC One news bulletins, with presenters appearing on-screen without jackets. Jenny Abramsky had originally planned to have a television version of the informal news radio channel BBC Radio 5 Live, or a TV version of Radio 4 News FM both of which she had run. The bright design of the set was also blamed for this \u2013 one insider reportedly described it as a \"car crash in a shower\" \u2013 and was subject to the network relaunch on 25 October 1999. The channel swapped studios with sister channel BBC World, moving to studio N8 within the newsroom, where it remained until 2008. New music and title sequences accompanied this set change, following the look of newly relaunched BBC One bulletins.\nGraphics and titles were developed by the Lambie-Nairn design agency and were gradually rolled out across the whole of BBC News, including a similar design for regional news starting with \"Newsroom South East\" and the three 'BBC Nations' \u2013 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The similarity of main BBC News output was intended to increase the credibility of the channel as well as aiding cross-channel promotion.\nA graphics relaunch in January 2007 saw the channel updated, with redesigned headline straplines, a redesigned 'digital on-screen graphic' and repositioned clock. The clock was originally placed to the left hand side of the channel name though following complaints that this could only be viewed in widescreen, it was moved to the right in February 2007. Bulletins on BBC World News and BBC One also introduced similar graphics and title sequences on the same day.\nIn 2008, the graphics were again relaunched, using the style introduced in 2007 and a new colour scheme. The typeface of the on-screen text was changed from Helvetica to Gill Sans.\nIn 2013 the graphics were changed again, to coincide with the move to New Broadcasting House. The typeface was changed back to Helvetica.\nThese were updated again in July 2019 when the BBC redesigned its on-air look with the growth of Television viewing on Smartphones and Tablets. These included again redesigned, larger headline straplines sharply contrasting with the background (drawing criticism for obscuring content) using the BBC Reith typeface with larger text. Despite this, the 2008 titles and music continue to be used for the updated Local titles.\nThe Lambert Report.\nThe Lambert Report into the channel's performance in 2002 called upon News 24 to develop a better brand of its own, to allow viewers to differentiate between itself and similar channels such as Sky News. As a direct result of this, a brand new style across all presentation for the channel launched on 8 December 2003 at 09:00. Philip Hayton and Anna Jones were the first two presenters on the set, the relaunch of which had been put back a week due to previous power disruptions at Television Centre where the channel was based. The new designs also featured a dynamic set of titles for the channel; the globe would begin spinning from where the main story was taking place, while the headline scrolled around in a ribbon; this was occasionally replaced by the BBC News logo. The titles concluded with a red globe surrounded by a red stylised clamshell and BBC News ribbons forming above the BBC News logo.\nBulletins on BBC One moved into a new set in January 2003 although retained the previous ivory Lambie-Nairn titles until February 2004. News 24 updated the title colours slightly to match those of BBC One bulletins in time for the 50th anniversary of BBC television news on 5 July 2004.\nCountdown sequence.\nAn important part of the channel's presentation since launch has been the top of the hour countdown sequence, since there is no presentation system with continuity announcers so the countdown provides a link to the beginning of the next hour. A similar musical device is used on BBC Radio 5 Live, and mirrors the pips on BBC Radio 4.\nPrevious styles have included a series of fictional flags set to music between 1997 and 1999 before the major relaunch, incorporating the new contemporary music composed by David Lowe, and graphics developed by Lambie-Nairn. Various images, originally ivory numbers fully animated against a deep red background, were designed to fit the pace of the channel, and the music soon gained notoriety, and was often satirised and parodied in popular culture, perhaps most famously by comic Bill Bailey who likened the theme music to an \"apocalyptic rave\". Images of life around the UK were added in replacement later with the same music, together with footage of the newsroom and exterior of Television Centre. The 2003 relaunch saw a small change to this style with less of a metropolitan feel to the footage.\nA new sequence was introduced on 28 March 2005, designed and created by Red Bee Media and directed by Mark Chaudoir. The full version ran for 60 seconds, though only around 30 seconds were usually shown on air. The music was revised completely but the biggest change came in the footage used \u2013 reflecting the methods and nature of newsgathering, while a strong emphasis was placed on the BBC logo itself. Satellite dishes are shown transmitting and receiving red \"data streams\". In production of the countdown sequence, Clive Norman filmed images around the United Kingdom, Richard Jopson in the United States, while BBC News cameramen filmed images from Iraq, Beijing (Tiananmen Square), Bund of Shanghai, Africa, as well as areas affected by the 2004 Asian tsunami and others.\nThe sequence has since seen several remixes to the music and a change in visuals to focus more on the well-known journalists, with less footage of camera crews and production teams. Changes have also seen the channel logo included during the sequences and at the end, as well as the fonts used for the time. The conclusion of the countdown was altered in 2008 to feature the new presentation style, rather than a data stream moving in towards the camera. Also in 2008, the graphic for the countdown changed, resembling BBC One Rhythm and Movement Idents, due to the logo being in a red square in inferior-left corner.\nTo coincide with the move of BBC News to Broadcasting House, on 18 March 2013 the countdown was updated again along with several other presentation elements. Three of the most striking features of the new countdown include music performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra, a redesign of the \"data streams\" and the ending of the sequence no longer fading to the BBC News globe and logo, but instead stopping with a time-lapse shot outside the corporation's headquarters. The countdown was also extended to 87 seconds, which was fully shown before the first hour from Broadcasting House.\nA full three-minute version of the countdown music was made available on BBC News Online and David Lowe's own website after a remix on 16 May 2006.\nAn international version of the countdown was launched on BBC World News on 5 September 2005 featuring more international content and similar music. Various changes have been made to the music and visuals since then, with presentation following the style of BBC News. The visuals in the sequence were updated on 10 May 2010. In June 2011, further imagery was added relating to recent events, including the conflict in Libya and views of outside 10 Downing Street. In January 2013, as part of the relocation of BBC News to Broadcasting House in Central London, BBC World News received a new countdown in the same style as the BBC News Channel's updated countdown, with some minor differences."}
{"id": "4622", "revid": "39430952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4622", "title": "Bill Oddie", "text": "William Edgar Oddie (born 7 July 1941) is an English writer, comedian, composer, musician, artist, birder, conservationist, television presenter and actor. He was a member of comedy trio The Goodies.\nA birder since his childhood in Quinton, Birmingham, Oddie has established a reputation as a naturalist, conservationist, and television presenter on wildlife issues. Some of his books are illustrated with his own paintings and drawings. His wildlife programmes for the BBC include \"Springwatch\" and \"Autumnwatch\", \"How to Watch Wildlife\", \"Wild in Your Garden\", \"Birding with Bill Oddie\", \"Britain Goes Wild with Bill Oddie\" and \"Bill Oddie Goes Wild\".\nEarly life.\nOddie was born in Rochdale, Lancashire but moved to Birmingham at a young age; his father was assistant chief accountant at the Midlands Electricity Board. His mother was diagnosed with schizophrenia and, during most of his youth, lived in a hospital. He was educated at Lapal Primary School, Halesowen Grammar School (now The Earls High School, Halesowen) and King Edward's School, Birmingham, an all-boys direct grant school, where he captained the school's rugby union team. He then studied English Literature at Pembroke College, Cambridge.\nCareer.\nComedy.\nWhile at Cambridge University Oddie appeared in several Footlights Club productions. One of these, a revue called \"A Clump of Plinths\", was so successful at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe that it was renamed \"Cambridge Circus\" and transferred to the West End in London, then New Zealand and Broadway in September 1964. Meanwhile, still at Cambridge, Oddie wrote scripts for and appeared briefly in TV's \"That Was the Week That Was\".\nHe appeared in Bernard Braden's television series \"On The Braden Beat\" in 1964. Subsequently, he was a key member of the performers in the BBC radio series \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", where many of his musical compositions were featured. Some were released on the album \"Distinctly Oddie\" (Polydor, 1967). He was one of the first performers to parody a rock song, arranging the traditional Yorkshire folk song \"On Ilkla Moor Baht'at\" in the style of Joe Cocker's hit rendition of the Beatles' \"With a Little Help from My Friends\" (released on John Peel's Dandelion Records in 1970 and featured in Peel's special box of most-treasured singles), and singing \"Andy Pandy\" in the style of a brassy soul number such as Wilson Pickett or Geno Washington might perform. In many shows he would do short impressions of Hughie Green.\nOn television Oddie was co-writer and performer in the comedy series \"Twice a Fortnight\" with Graeme Garden, Terry Jones, Michael Palin and Jonathan Lynn. Later, he was co-writer and performer in the comedy series \"Broaden Your Mind\" with Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, for which Oddie became a cast member for the second series.\nOddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden then co-wrote and appeared in their television comedy series \"The Goodies\" (1970\u20131982). The Goodies also released records, including \"Father Christmas Do Not Touch Me\"/\"The In-Betweenies\", \"Funky Gibbon\", and \"Black Pudding Bertha\", which were hit singles in 1974\u201375. They reformed, briefly, in 2005, for a successful 13-date tour of Australia.\nOddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden voiced characters on the 1983 animated children's programme \"Bananaman\".\nIn the Amnesty International show \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\", Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden sang their hit song \"Funky Gibbon\". They also appeared on \"Top of the Pops\" with the song. Together with Garden (who is a qualified doctor), Oddie co-wrote many episodes of the television comedy series \"Doctor in the House\", including most of the first season and all of the second season. He has occasionally appeared on the BBC Radio 4 panel game \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", on which Garden is and Brooke-Taylor was a regular panellist. In 1982 Garden and Oddie wrote, but did not perform in, a six-part science fiction sitcom called \"Astronauts\" for Central and ITV. The show was set in an international space station in the near future.\nNatural history.\nOddie's first published work was an article about the birdlife of Birmingham's Bartley Reservoir in the West Midland Bird Club's 1962 Annual Report (he is first credited in the 1956 report, in which reports of his bird observations are tagged with his initials \"WEO\"). He has since written a number of books about birds and birdwatching, as well as articles for many specialist publications including \"British Birds\", \"Birdwatching Magazine\" and \"Birdwatch\".\nHe discussed bird song recordings with Derek Jones in an August 1973 BBC Radio 4 programme called \"Sounds Natural\".\nIn the autumn of 1976 Oddie was involved in the successful identification of Britain's first ever record of Pallas's reed bunting on Fair Isle, Shetland.\nOne of Oddie's first forays in the world of television natural history was as a guest on \"Animal Magic\" in December 1977. Another early natural history radio appearance was in October, as the guest on Radio 4's \"Through My Window\", discussing the birds of Hampstead Heath.\nOn 30 July 1985, he was the subject of a 50-minute \"Nature Watch Special: Bill Oddie\u00a0\u2013 Bird Watcher\", in which he was interviewed by Julian Pettifer at places where he had spent time birding, including Bartley Reservoir, the Christopher Cadbury Wetland Reserve at Upton Warren, RSPB Titchwell Marsh and Blakeney Point.\nOddie has since hosted a number of successful nature programmes for the BBC, many produced by Stephen Moss, including:\nOn its first evening of broadcast in 2004, \"Britain Goes Wild\" set a record for its timeslot of 8\u00a0pm on BBC Two of 3.4\u00a0million viewers, one million more than the Channel 4 programme showing at that time. \"Britain Goes Wild\", renamed \"Springwatch\" the following year, became a wildlife broadcasting phenomenon, attracting up to 5\u00a0million viewers. \nHe became president of the West Midland Bird Club in 1999, having been Vice-President since 1991, and is a former member of the council of the RSPB. Oddie is also a President of the League Against Cruel Sports and a vice-president of the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers. He practised as a bird ringer, but allowed his licence to lapse.\nIn 2003 Oddie set up a half-marathon to raise money for various wildlife charities in his birth-town of Rochdale. Celebrities who have participated in the event include Ray Mears, Catherine Jenkins and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall.\nIn 2011, Oddie featured as an investigator in \"Snares Uncovered: killers in the countryside\". The film carried out an expos\u00e9 of snaring in Scotland and was commissioned by animal protection charity OneKind. During the investigation, Oddie discovered over 70 snare traps and several stink pits.\nMusic.\nOddie wrote original music at Cambridge University for the Footlights and later wrote comic songs for \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\". He also wrote a number of comic songs for The Goodies, most of them performed by Oddie.\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, Oddie released a number of singles and at least one album. One of the former, issued in 1970 on John Peel's Dandelion Records label (Catalogue No: 4786), was \"On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at\", performed in the style of Joe Cocker's \"With a Little Help from my Friends\". The B-side, \"Harry Krishna\", featured the Hare Krishna chant, substituting the names of contemporary famous people called Harry, including Harry Secombe, Harry Worth, Harry Lauder, and Harry Corbett, as well as puns such as \"Harry [Hurry] along now\", \"Harrystotle [Aristotle]\" and ending with \"Harry-ly [I really] must go now\". Both tracks appear on the compilation CD \"Life Too, Has Surface Noise: The Complete Dandelion Records Singles Collection 1969\u20131972\" (2007). In 1966, he was credited as the vocalist with Spencer's Washboard Kings on \"Five Feet Two\" (Rayrick LCR1001a). The vocalist on the B-side of this 45rpm single, \"If You Knew Susie\", was Jean Hart, Oddie's future wife.\nHe played the drums and saxophone and appeared as Cousin Kevin in a production of The Who's rock opera \"Tommy\" at the Rainbow Theatre, Finsbury Park, London, on 9 December 1972. He has also contributed vocals to a Rick Wakeman album, \"Criminal Record\".\nOddie took part in the English National Opera production of the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera \"The Mikado\", in which he appeared in the role of the \"Lord High Executioner\", taking over the role from Eric Idle. During the early 1990s, Oddie was a DJ for London-based jazz radio station 102.2 Jazz FM.\nIn 2007, Oddie appeared on the BBC series \"Play It Again\". In the episode he attempts to realise his dream of becoming a rock guitarist. Initially teacher Bridget Mermikides tries to teach him using traditional methods but he rebels: instead he turns to old friends Albert Lee, Dave Davies (of The Kinks) and Mark Knopfler for advice and strikes out on his own. He succeeds in the target of playing lead guitar for his daughter Rosie's band at her 21st birthday party, and even manages to impress his erstwhile teacher.\nIn November 2010, he agreed, along with fellow members of The Goodies, to re-release their 1970s hit \"The Funky Gibbon\" to raise funds for the International Primate Protection League's Save the Gibbon appeal.\nOther television and audio appearances.\nOddie appeared as the hapless window cleaner in the Eric Sykes' comedy story \"The Plank\" in 1967. He also presented the live children's Saturday morning entertainment show \"Saturday Banana\" (ITV/Southern Television) during the late 1970s. In the late 1980s he was a presenter of the BBC TV show \"Fax\" (a show about 'facts').\nIn 1981, he appeared as a Telethon celebrity in New Zealand, hosted by TV1. He voices Asterix in the UK dub of the 1989 animated film \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" (an animated adaptation of the books \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" and \"Asterix and the Soothsayer\", novelized as \"Operation Getafix\").\nIn the 1990s, he became better known as a presenter of birdwatching, and later wildlife-related, programmes such as \"Springwatch\". Although he remains almost unknown to US audiences, in 1992 he was a guest star in the US comedy television series \"Married... with Children\" for a three-part episode set in England.\nIn 1997\u201398, he appeared on the Channel 4 archaeological programme \"Time Team\", as the team excavated a Roman villa site in Turkdean, Gloucestershire.\nHe was the comp\u00e8re of a daytime BBC gameshow \"History Hunt\" (in 2003); and has appeared in the \"Doctor Who\" audio drama \"Doctor Who and the Pirates\". In 2004, he appeared in the BBC show \"Who Do You Think You Are?\", in which he looked into his ancestry \u2013 he was visibly moved by its revelations. His story, in fact, was that long-running series' very first episode. In 2005, he took part in \"Rolf on Art \u2013 the big event at Trafalgar Square\" and in September that year was also a celebrity guest along with Lynda Bellingham on the ITV1 programme \"Who Wants to be a Millionaire\". He also gave opinions on 100 greatest cartoons on Channel 4 that year, talking about \"Tom and Jerry\" and cartoon incidents such as the \"Asses of Fire skit\" in \"\".\nIn 2006, Oddie appeared in the BBC show \"Never Mind the Buzzcocks\", and also appeared on the topical quiz show \"8 out of 10 Cats\". He was also the voice behind many B&amp;Q adverts throughout 2006/2007. On 25 May 2007, Oddie made a cameo appearance on Ronni Ancona's new comedy sketch show, \"Ronni Ancona &amp; Co\".\nAlso in 2007, three artists each painted a portrait of Oddie, as part of the BBC programme \"Star Portraits with Rolf Harris\". One of the artists, Mark Roscoe, later revealed a dislike of Oddie, claiming to have included hidden insults in his work.\nHe hosted the genealogy-based series \"My Famous Family\", broadcast on UKTV History in 2007. In 2008, Oddie was a guest on Jamie Oliver's television special \"Jamie's Fowl Dinners\", talking about free-range chickens.\nHe also appeared on \"Would I Lie To You?\" in 2011 where he revealed that he was saved from drowning by Freddy from popular children's series \"Rainbow\" and \"Rod, Jane and Freddy\" while on holiday in the Seychelles.\nIn February 2015, Oddie appeared in \"The Keith Lemon Sketch Show\" as the narrator of the sketch \"Ed Sheeran Watch\".\nHe appeared as a contestant on a celebrity edition of \"Fifteen to One\" in August 2015.\n2013 Australian tour.\nOddie undertook an Australian tour during June 2013 in all of the mainland states capital cities \u2013 Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth \u2013 in a series of one-off shows, \"An Oldie but a Goodie\". A video message from Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden was shown during the performances. Oddie made personal appearances on both \"The Project\" and \"Adam Hills Tonight\" TV shows during the tour; he also filmed a guest-programming spot for the ABC-TV's all-night music video show \"Rage\".\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nIn 1967, Oddie married Jean Hart, and from this marriage he has two daughters, one of whom is the actor Kate Hardie.\nIn 1983, Oddie married Laura Beaumont-Giles. The couple have worked on a variety of projects for children, including film scripts, drama and comedy series, puppet shows and books. They have a daughter, Rosie, born in October 1985, and live in Hampstead, North London. Rosie Oddie is a musician, also using the name Rosie Bones.\nDepression and bipolar disorder.\nOddie experienced depression for most of his life before being diagnosed with clinical depression in 2001. In March 2009 he was reportedly admitted to Capio Nightingale psychiatric hospital in Marylebone for treatment. His then-agent David Foster said: \"Bill gets these bouts every two or three years where he gets down for about two weeks and recovers. He sometimes goes into hospital or takes a break or has a change of scenery to recharge his batteries.\" In January 2010 Oddie spoke to the media, revealing that he had in fact had two separate stays in different hospitals, only being discharged \"in time for Christmas\". He said that he was dealing with depression and bipolar disorder, describing the period as \"probably the worst 12 months of my life\". Oddie stated that he was planning to meet with BBC executives to discuss his return to television work.\nHis illness meant that Oddie did not appear in the 2009 and 2010 series of \"Springwatch\", although he made a guest appearance in the penultimate episode of the latter. He subsequently said he was dismissed from \"Springwatch\" and that this had caused the depressive illness.\nOddie presented the BBC Radio 4 Appeal programme on 10 August 2014 on behalf of the charity Bipolar UK. He revealed that as a consequence of his bipolar disorder he had attempted suicide during one of his depressive episodes. On the UK TV programme \"Who Do You Think You Are?\" he attributed his depression and bipolar disorder as an adult to his minimal and painful relationship with his mother.\nPolitical views.\nOddie supports the Green Party. In October 2014, on the BBC's \"Sunday Morning Live\", he stated that he wanted a limit on the number of children that British families can have, saying that he was \"very often ashamed\" to be British, calling them \"a terrible race\".\nHonours.\nIn 2002, Oddie became the third person to decline to appear on \"This Is Your Life\". He changed his mind a few hours later and agreed to appear on the show. On 16 October 2003, Oddie was made an OBE for his service to Wildlife Conservation in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace. He wore a camouflage shirt and crumpled jacket to receive his medal. In June 2004, Oddie and Johnny Morris were jointly profiled in the first of a three part BBC Two series, \"The Way We Went Wild\", about television wildlife presenters. In May 2005, he received the British Naturalists' Association's Peter Scott Memorial Award, from BNA president David Bellamy, \"in recognition of his great contribution to our understanding of natural history and conservation.\" He is a recipient of the RSPB Medal.\nOn 30 June 2009, he was proposed for inclusion in the Birmingham Walk of Stars, with the public invited to vote.\nBibliography.\nBill Oddie also co-wrote the Springwatch &amp; Autumnwatch book with Kate Humble and Simon King.\nCo-written with the other members of The Goodies:\nCo-written with Laura Beaumont:\nIn popular culture.\nIn the fictional world of comedy character Alan Partridge, Oddie is an unseen presence in Alan's life, buying him dressing gowns for Christmas and being part of a radicalised RSPB. He has also been referenced, often humorously, by the hosts of \"Top Gear\". Jeremy Clarkson used a mask of Oddie's face to escape speed cameras while racing the Nissan GT-R against the Bullet train in Japan in Episode 4 of \"Top Gear\"s 11th series. James May also raced in Finland against an Oddie lookalike who won the race."}
{"id": "4623", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4623", "title": "Britain and Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "4626", "revid": "13902714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4626", "title": "Broadway (Manhattan)", "text": "Broadway () is a road in the U.S. state of New York. Broadway runs from State Street at Bowling Green for through the borough of Manhattan and through the Bronx, exiting north from New York City to run an additional through the Westchester County municipalities of Yonkers, Hastings-On-Hudson, Dobbs Ferry, Irvington, and Tarrytown, and terminating north of Sleepy Hollow.\nIt is the oldest north\u2013south main thoroughfare in New York City, with much of the current street beginning as the Wickquasgeck trail before the arrival of Europeans. This formed the basis for one of the primary thoroughfares of the Dutch New Amsterdam colony, which continued under British rule, although most of it did not bear its current name until the late 19th century.\nBroadway in Manhattan is known widely as the heart of the American commercial theatrical industry, and is used as a metonym for it, as well as in the names of alternative theatrical ventures such as Off-Broadway and Off-off-Broadway.\nHistory.\nColonial history.\nBroadway was originally the Wickquasgeck trail, carved into the brush of Manhattan by its Native American inhabitants. This trail originally snaked through swamps and rocks along the length of Manhattan Island.\nUpon the arrival of the Dutch, the trail was widened and soon became the main road through the island from \"Nieuw Amsterdam\" at the southern tip. The Dutch explorer and entrepreneur David Pietersz. de Vries gives the first mention of it in his journal for the year 1642 (\"the Wickquasgeck Road over which the Indians passed daily\"). The Dutch called it the \"Heeren Wegh\" or \"Heeren Straat\", meaning \"Gentlemen's Way\" or \"Gentlemen's Street\" \u2013 echoing the name of a similar street in Amsterdam \u2013 or \"High Street\" or \"the Highway\"; it was renamed \"Broadway\" after the British took over the city, because of its unusual width. Although currently the name of the street is simply \"Broadway\", in a 1776 map of New York City, it is labeled as \"Broadway Street\". \n18th and 19th centuries.\nIn the 18th century, Broadway ended at the town commons north of Wall Street. The part of Broadway in what is now lower Manhattan was known as \"Great George Street\". Traffic continued up the East Side of the island via Eastern Post Road and the West Side via Bloomingdale Road. The latter, which opened in 1703, continued up to 117th Street and contributed to the development of the modern Upper West Side into an upscale area with mansions. \nIn her 1832 book \"Domestic Manners of the Americans\", Fanny Trollope wrote of her impressions of New York City in general and of Broadway in particular:\nThis noble street may vie with any I ever saw, for its length and breadth, its handsome shops, neat awnings, excellent \"trottoir\", and well-dressed pedestrians. It has not the crowded glitter of Bond Street equipages, nor the gorgeous fronted palaces of Regent Street; but it is magnificent in its extent, and ornamented by several handsome buildings, some of them surrounded by grass and trees.\nIn 1868, Bloomingdale Road between 59th Street (at the Grand Circle, now Columbus Circle) and 155th Streets would be paved and widened, becoming an avenue with landscaped medians. It was called \"Western Boulevard\" or \"The Boulevard\". An 1897 official map of the city shows a segment of what is now Broadway as \"Kingsbridge Road\" in the vicinity of Washington Heights.\nOn February 14, 1899, the name \"Broadway\" was extended to the entire Broadway / Bloomingdale / Boulevard / Kingsbridge complex.\n20th century.\nIn the 20th century, a 30-block stretch of Broadway, extending mainly between Times Square at 42nd Street and Sherman Square at 72nd Street, formed part of Manhattan's \"Automobile Row\". Before the first decade of the 20th century, the area was occupied mostly by equestrian industries and was \"thoroughly lifeless\", but by 1907, \"The New York Times\" characterized this section of Broadway as having \"almost a solid line of motor vehicle signs all the way from Times Square to Sherman Square\". In the late 1900s and early 1910s, several large automobile showrooms, stores, and garages were built on Broadway, including the U.S. Rubber Company Building at 58th Street, the B.F. Goodrich showroom at 1780 Broadway (between 58th and 57th Streets), the Fisk Building at 250 West 57th Street, and the Demarest and Peerless Buildings at 224 West 57th Street.\nBroadway once was a two-way street for its entire length. The present status, in which it runs one-way southbound south of Columbus Circle (59th Street), came about in several stages. On June 6, 1954, Seventh Avenue became southbound and Eighth Avenue became northbound south of Broadway. None of Broadway became one-way, but the increased southbound traffic between Columbus Circle (Eighth Avenue) and Times Square (Seventh Avenue) caused the city to re-stripe that section of Broadway for four southbound and two northbound lanes. Broadway became one-way from Columbus Circle south to Herald Square (34th Street) on March 10, 1957, in conjunction with Sixth Avenue becoming one-way from Herald Square north to 59th Street and Seventh Avenue becoming one-way from 59th Street south to Times Square (where it crosses Broadway). On June 3, 1962, Broadway became one-way south of Canal Street, with Trinity Place and Church Street carrying northbound traffic.\nAnother change was made on November 10, 1963, when Broadway became one-way southbound from Herald Square to Madison Square (23rd Street) and Union Square (14th Street) to Canal Street, and two routes \u2013 Sixth Avenue south of Herald Square and Centre Street, Lafayette Street, and Fourth Avenue south of Union Square \u2013 became one-way northbound. Finally, at the same time as Madison Avenue became one-way northbound and Fifth Avenue became one-way southbound, Broadway was made one-way southbound between Madison Square (where Fifth Avenue crosses) and Union Square on January 14, 1966, completing its conversion south of Columbus Circle.\n21st century.\nIn 2001, a one-block section of Broadway between 72nd Street and 73rd Street at Verdi Square was reconfigured. Its easternmost lanes, which formerly hosted northbound traffic, were turned into a public park when a new subway entrance for the 72nd Street station was built in the exact location of these lanes. Northbound traffic on Broadway is now channeled onto Amsterdam Avenue to 73rd Street, makes a left turn on the three-lane 73rd Street, and then a right turn on Broadway shortly afterward.\nIn August 2008, two traffic lanes from 42nd to 35th Streets were taken out of service and converted to public plazas. Additionally, bike lanes were added on Broadway from 42nd Street down to Union Square.\nSince May 2009, the portions of Broadway through Duffy Square, Times Square, and Herald Square have been closed entirely to automobile traffic, except for cross traffic on the Streets and Avenues, as part of a traffic and pedestrianization experiment, with the pavement reserved exclusively for walkers, cyclists, and those lounging in temporary seating placed by the city. The city decided that the experiment was successful, and decided to make the change permanent in February 2010. Though the anticipated benefits to traffic flow were not as large as hoped, pedestrian injuries dropped dramatically and foot traffic increased in the designated areas; the project was popular with both residents and businesses. The current portions converted into pedestrian plazas are between West 47th Street and West 42nd Street within Times and Duffy Squares, and between West 35th Street and West 33rd Street in the Herald Square area. Additionally, portions of Broadway in the Madison Square and Union Square have been dramatically narrowed, allowing ample pedestrian plazas to exist along the side of the road.\nIn May 2013, the NYCDOT decided to redesign Broadway between 35th and 42nd Streets for the second time in five years, owing to poor connections between pedestrian plazas and decreased vehicular traffic. With the new redesign, the bike lane is now on the right side of the street; it was formerly on the left side adjacent to the pedestrian plazas, causing conflicts between pedestrian and bicycle traffic.\nIn spring 2017, as part of a capital reconstruction of Worth Square, Broadway between 24th and 25th Street was converted to a \"shared street\" where through vehicles are banned and delivery vehicles are restricted to . Delivery vehicles go northbound from Fifth Avenue to 25th Street for that one block, reversing the direction of traffic and preventing vehicles from going south on Broadway south of 25th Street. The capital project expands on a 2008 initiative where part of the intersection of Broadway and Fifth Avenue was repurposed into a public plaza, simplifying that intersection. As part of the 2017 project, Worth Square was expanded, converting the adjoining block of Broadway into a \"shared street\".\nRoute.\nRoute description.\nBroadway runs the length of Manhattan Island, roughly parallel to the North River (the portion of the Hudson River bordering Manhattan), from Bowling Green at the south to Inwood at the northern tip of the island. South of Columbus Circle, it is a one-way southbound street. Since 2009, vehicular traffic has been banned at Times Square between 47th and 42nd Streets, and at Herald Square between 35th and 33rd Streets as part of a pilot program; the right-of-way is intact and reserved for cyclists and pedestrians. From the northern shore of Manhattan, Broadway crosses Spuyten Duyvil Creek via the Broadway Bridge and continues through Marble Hill (a discontiguous portion of the borough of Manhattan) and the Bronx into Westchester County. U.S. 9 continues to be known as Broadway until its junction with NY 117.\nLower Manhattan.\nThe section of lower Broadway from its origin at Bowling Green to City Hall Park is the historical location for the city's ticker-tape parades, and is sometimes called the \"Canyon of Heroes\" during such events. West of Broadway, as far as Canal Street, was the city's fashionable residential area until circa 1825; landfill has more than tripled the area, and the Hudson River shore now lies far to the west, beyond Tribeca and Battery Park City.\nBroadway marks the boundary between Greenwich Village to the west and the East Village to the east, passing Astor Place. It is a short walk from there to New York University near Washington Square Park, which is at the foot of Fifth Avenue. A bend in front of Grace Church allegedly avoids an earlier tavern; from 10th Street it begins its long diagonal course across Manhattan, headed almost due north.\nMidtown Manhattan.\nBecause Broadway preceded the grid that the Commissioners' Plan of 1811 imposed on the island, Broadway crosses midtown Manhattan diagonally, intersecting with both the east\u2013west streets and north\u2013south avenues. Broadway's intersections with avenues, marked by \"squares\" (some merely triangular slivers of open space), have induced some interesting architecture, such as the Flatiron Building.\nAt Union Square, Broadway crosses 14th Street, merges with Fourth Avenue, and continues its diagonal uptown course from the Square's northwest corner; Union Square is the only location wherein the physical section of Broadway is discontinuous in Manhattan (other portions of Broadway in Manhattan are pedestrian-only plazas). At Madison Square, the location of the Flatiron Building, Broadway crosses Fifth Avenue at 23rd Street, and is discontinuous to vehicles for a one-block stretch between 24th and 25th Streets. At Greeley Square (West 33rd Street), Broadway crosses Sixth Avenue (Avenue of the Americas), and is discontinuous to vehicles. Macy's Herald Square department store, one block north of the vehicular discontinuity, is located on the northwest corner of Broadway and West 34th Street and southwest corner of Broadway and West 35th Street; it is one of the largest department stores in the world.\nOne famous stretch near Times Square, where Broadway crosses Seventh Avenue in midtown Manhattan, is the home of many Broadway theatres, housing an ever-changing array of commercial, large-scale plays, particularly musicals. This area of Manhattan is often called the Theater District or the Great White Way, a nickname originating in the headline \"Found on the Great White Way\" in the February 3, 1902, edition of the \"New York Evening Telegram\". The journalistic nickname was inspired by the millions of lights on theater marquees and billboard advertisements that illuminate the area. After becoming the city's de facto red-light district in the 1960s and 1970s (as can be seen in the films \"Taxi Driver\" and \"Midnight Cowboy\"), since the late 1980s Times Square has emerged as a family tourist center, in effect being Disneyfied following the company's purchase and renovation of the New Amsterdam Theatre on 42nd Street in 1993.\n\"The New York Times\", from which the Square gets its name, was published at offices at 239 West 43rd Street; the paper stopped printing papers there on June 15, 2007.\nUpper West Side.\nAt the southwest corner of Central Park, Broadway crosses Eighth Avenue (called Central Park West north of 59th Street) at West 59th Street and Columbus Circle; on the site of the former New York Coliseum convention center is the new shopping center at the foot of the Time Warner Center, headquarters of Time Warner. From Columbus Circle northward, Broadway becomes a wide boulevard to 169th Street; it retains landscaped center islands that separate northbound from southbound traffic. The medians are a vestige of the central mall of \"The Boulevard\" that had become the spine of the Upper West Side, and many of these contain public seating.\nBroadway intersects with Columbus Avenue (known as Ninth Avenue south of West 59th Street) at West 65th and 66th Streets where the Juilliard School and Lincoln Center, both well-known performing arts landmarks, as well as the Manhattan New York Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are located.\nBetween West 70th and 73rd Streets, Broadway intersects with Amsterdam Avenue (known as 10th Avenue south of West 59th Street). The wide intersection of the two thoroughfares has historically been the site of numerous traffic accidents and pedestrian casualties, partly due to the long crosswalks. Two small triangular plots of land were created at points where Broadway slices through Amsterdam Avenue. One is a tiny fenced-in patch of shrubbery and plants at West 70th Street called Sherman Square (although it and the surrounding intersection have also been known collectively as Sherman Square), and the other triangle is a lush tree-filled garden bordering Amsterdam Avenue from just above West 72nd Street to West 73rd Street. Named Verdi Square in 1921 for its monument to Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi, which was erected in 1909, this triangular sliver of public space was designated a Scenic Landmark by the Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1974, one of nine city parks that have received the designation. In the 1960s and 1970s, the area surrounding both Verdi Square and Sherman Square was known by local drug users and dealers as \"Needle Park\", and was featured prominently in the gritty 1971 dramatic film \"The Panic in Needle Park\", directed by Jerry Schatzberg and starring Al Pacino in his second onscreen role.\nThe original brick and stone shelter leading to the entrance of the 72nd Street subway station, one of the first 28 subway stations in Manhattan, remains located on one of the wide islands in the center of Broadway, on the south side of West 72nd Street. For many years, all traffic on Broadway flowed on either side of this median and its subway entrance, and its uptown lanes went past it along the western edge of triangular Verdi Square. In 2001 and 2002, renovation of the historic 72nd Street station and the addition of a second subway control house and passenger shelter on an adjacent center median just north of 72nd Street, across from the original building, resulted in the creation of a public plaza with stone pavers and extensive seating, connecting the newer building with Verdi Square, and making it necessary to divert northbound traffic to Amsterdam Avenue for one block. While Broadway's southbound lanes at this intersection were unaffected by the new construction, its northbound lanes are no longer contiguous at this intersection. Drivers can either continue along Amsterdam Avenue to head uptown or turn left on West 73rd Street to resume traveling on Broadway.\nSeveral notable apartment buildings are in close proximity to this intersection, including The Ansonia, its ornate architecture dominating the cityscape here. After the Ansonia first opened as a hotel, live seals were kept in indoor fountains inside its lobby. Later, it was home to the infamous Plato's Retreat nightclub. Immediately north of Verdi Square is the formidable Apple Bank for Savings building, formerly the Central Savings Bank, which was built in 1926 and designed to resemble the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Broadway is also home to the Beacon Theatre at West 74th Street, designated a national landmark in 1979 and still in operation as a concert venue after its establishment in 1929 as a vaudeville and music hall, and \"sister\" venue to Radio City Music Hall.\nAt its intersection with West 78th Street, Broadway shifts direction and continues directly uptown and aligned approximately with the Commissioners' grid. Past the bend are the historic Apthorp apartment building, built in 1908, and the First Baptist Church in the City of New York, incorporated in New York in 1762, its current building on Broadway erected in 1891. The road heads north and passes historically important apartment houses such as the Belnord, the Astor Court Building, and the Art Nouveau Cornwall.\nAt Broadway and 95th Street is Symphony Space, established in 1978 as home to avant-garde and classical music and dance performances in the former Symphony Theatre, which was originally built in 1918 as a premier \"music and motion-picture house\". At 99th Street, Broadway passes between the controversial skyscrapers of the Ariel East and West.\nAt 107th Street, Broadway merges with West End Avenue, with the intersection forming Straus Park with its Titanic Memorial by Augustus Lukeman.\nNorthern Manhattan and the Bronx.\nBroadway then passes the campus of Columbia University at 116th Street in Morningside Heights, in part on the tract that housed the Bloomingdale Insane Asylum from 1808 until it moved to Westchester County in 1894. Still in Morningside Heights, Broadway passes the park-like campus of Barnard College. Next, the Gothic quadrangle of Union Theological Seminary, and the brick buildings of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America with their landscaped interior courtyards, face one another across Broadway. On the next block is the Manhattan School of Music.\nBroadway then runs past the Manhattanville campus of Columbia University, and the main campus of CUNY\u2013City College near 135th Street; the Gothic buildings of the original City College campus are out of sight, a block to the east. Also to the east are the brownstones of Hamilton Heights. Hamilton Place is a surviving section of Bloomingdale Road, and originally the address of Alexander Hamilton's house, The Grange, which has been moved.\nBroadway achieves a verdant, park-like effect, particularly in the spring, when it runs between the uptown Trinity Church Cemetery and the former Trinity Chapel, now the Church of the Intercession near 155th Street.\nNewYork\u2013Presbyterian Hospital lies on Broadway near 166th, 167th, and 168th Streets in Washington Heights. The intersection with St. Nicholas Avenue at 167th Street forms Mitchell Square Park. At 178th Street, U.S. 9 becomes concurrent with Broadway.\nBroadway crosses the Harlem River on the Broadway Bridge to Marble Hill. Afterward, it then enters the Bronx, where it is the eastern border of Riverdale and the western border of Van Cortlandt Park. At 253rd Street, NY 9A joins with U.S. 9 and Broadway. (NY 9A splits off Broadway at Ashburton Avenue in Yonkers.)\nWestchester County.\nThe northwestern corner of the park marks the New York City limit and Broadway enters Westchester County in Yonkers, where it is now known as South Broadway. It trends ever westward, closer to the Hudson River, remaining a busy urban commercial street. In downtown Yonkers, it drops close to the river, becomes North Broadway and 9A leaves via Ashburton Avenue. Broadway climbs to the nearby ridgetop runs parallel to the river and the railroad, a few blocks east of both as it passes St. John's Riverside Hospital. The neighborhoods become more residential and the road gently undulates along the ridgetop. In Yonkers, Broadway passes the historic Philipse Manor house, which dates back to colonial times.\nIt remains Broadway as it leaves Yonkers for Hastings-on-Hudson, where it splits into separate north and south routes for . The trees become taller and the houses, many separated from the road by stone fences, become larger. Another National Historic Landmark, the John William Draper House, was the site of the first astrophotograph of the Moon.\nIn the next village, Dobbs Ferry, Broadway has various views of the Hudson River while passing through the residential section. Broadway passes by the Old Croton Aqueduct and nearby the shopping district of the village. After intersecting with Ashford Avenue, Broadway passes Mercy College, then turns left again at the center of town just past South Presbyterian Church, headed for equally comfortable Ardsley-on-Hudson and Irvington. Villa Lewaro, the home of Madam C. J. Walker, the first African-American millionaire, is along the highway here. At the north end of the village of Irvington, a memorial to writer Washington Irving, after whom the village was renamed, marks the turnoff to his home at Sunnyside. Entering into the southern portion of Tarrytown, Broadway passes by historic Lyndhurst mansion, a massive mansion built along the Hudson River built in the early 1800s.\nNorth of here, at the Kraft Foods technical center, the Tappan Zee Bridge becomes visible. After crossing under the Thruway and I-87 again, here concurrent with I-287, and then intersecting with the four-lane NY\u00a0119, where 119 splits off to the east, Broadway becomes the busy main street of Tarrytown. Christ Episcopal Church, where Irving worshiped, is along the street. Many high-quality restaurants and shops are along this main road. This downtown ends at the eastern terminus of NY\u00a0448, where Broadway slopes off to the left, downhill, and four signs indicate that Broadway turns left, passing the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow, another NHL. The road then enters Sleepy Hollow (formerly North Tarrytown), passing the visitors' center for Kykuit, the National Historic Landmark that was (and partially still is) the Rockefeller family's estate. Broadway then passes the historic Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, which includes the resting place of Washington Irving and the setting for \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\".\nBroadway expands to four lanes at the trumpet intersection with NY\u00a0117, where it finally ends and U.S.\u00a09 becomes Albany Post Road (and Highland Avenue) at the northern border of Sleepy Hollow, New York.\nNicknamed sections.\nCanyon of Heroes.\n\"Canyon of Heroes\" is occasionally used to refer to the section of lower Broadway in the Financial District that is the location of the city's ticker-tape parade. The traditional route of the parade is northward from Bowling Green to City Hall Park. Most of the route is lined with tall office buildings along both sides, affording a view of the parade for thousands of office workers who create the snowstorm-like jettison of shredded paper products that characterize the parade.\nWhile typical sports championship parades have been showered with some 50 tons of confetti and shredded paper, the V-J Day parade on August 14\u201315, 1945 \u2013 marking the end of World War II \u2013 was covered with 5,438 tons of paper, based on estimates provided by the New York City Department of Sanitation.\nMore than 200 black granite strips embedded in the sidewalks along the Canyon of Heroes list honorees of past ticker-tape parades.\nGreat White Way.\n\"The Great White Way\" is a nickname for a section of Broadway in Midtown Manhattan, specifically the portion that encompasses the Theater District, between 42nd and 53rd Streets, and encompassing Times Square.\nIn 1880, a stretch of Broadway between Union Square and Madison Square was illuminated by Brush arc lamps, making it among the first electrically lighted streets in the United States. By the 1890s, the portion from 23rd Street to 34th Street was so brightly illuminated by electrical advertising signs, that people began calling it \"The Great White Way\". When the theater district moved uptown, the name was transferred to the Times Square area.\nThe phrase \"Great White Way\" has been attributed to Shep Friedman, columnist for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\" in 1901, who lifted the term from the title of a book about the Arctic by Albert Paine. The headline \"Found on the Great White Way\" appeared in the February 3, 1902, edition of the \"New York Evening Telegram\".\nA portrait of Broadway in the early part of the 20th century and \"The Great White Way\" late at night appeared in \"Artist In Manhattan\" (1940) written by the artist-historian Jerome Myers:\nTransportation.\nFrom south to north, Broadway at one point or another runs over or under various New York City Subway lines, including the IRT Lexington Avenue Line, the BMT Broadway Line, IRT Broadway\u2013Seventh Avenue Line, and IND Eighth Avenue Line (the IND Sixth Avenue Line is the only north\u2013south trunk line in Manhattan that does not run along Broadway).\nEarly street railways on Broadway included the Broadway and Seventh Avenue Railroad's Broadway and University Place Line (1864?) between Union Square (14th Street) and Times Square (42nd Street), the Ninth Avenue Railroad's Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues Line (1884) between 65th Street and 71st Street, the Forty-second Street, Manhattanville and St. Nicholas Avenue Railway's Broadway Branch Line (1885?) between Times Square and 125th Street, and the Kingsbridge Railway's Kingsbridge Line north of 169th Street. The Broadway Surface Railroad's Broadway Line, a cable car line, opened on lower Broadway (below Times Square) in 1893, and soon became the core of the Metropolitan Street Railway, with two cable branches: the Broadway and Lexington Avenue Line and Broadway and Columbus Avenue Line.\nThese streetcar lines were replaced with bus routes in the 1930s and 1940s. Before Broadway became one-way, the main bus routes along it were the New York City Omnibus Company's (NYCO) 6 (Broadway below Times Square), 7 (Broadway and Columbus Avenue), and 11 (Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues), and the Surface Transportation Corporation's M100 (Kingsbridge) and M104 (Broadway Branch). Additionally, the Fifth Avenue Coach Company's (FACCo) 4 and 5 used Broadway from 135th Street north to Washington Heights, and their 5 and 6 used Broadway between 57th Street and 72nd Street. With the implementation of one-way traffic, the northbound 6 and 7 were moved to Sixth Avenue.\n, Broadway is served by the M4 (ex-FACCo 4), M7 (ex-NYCO 7), M55, M100, and M104. Other routes that use part of Broadway include the M5 (ex-FACCo 5), M10, M20, M60 Select Bus Service, Bx7, Bx9, and Bx20.\nBee-Line buses also serves Broadway within Riverdale and Westchester County. Routes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 13, and several others run on a portion of Broadway.\nNotable buildings.\nBroadway is lined with many famous and otherwise noted and historic buildings, such as:\nHistoric buildings on Broadway that are now demolished include:\nReferences.\nNotes\nCitations\nBibliography"}
{"id": "4628", "revid": "8694423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4628", "title": "Bilinear transform", "text": "The bilinear transform (also known as Tustin's method) is used in digital signal processing and discrete-time control theory to transform continuous-time system representations to discrete-time and vice versa.\nThe bilinear transform is a special case of a conformal mapping (namely, a M\u00f6bius transformation), often used to convert a transfer function formula_1 of a linear, time-invariant (LTI) filter in the continuous-time domain (often called an analog filter) to a transfer function formula_2 of a linear, shift-invariant filter in the discrete-time domain (often called a digital filter although there are analog filters constructed with switched capacitors that are discrete-time filters). It maps positions on the formula_3 axis, formula_4, in the s-plane to the unit circle, formula_5, in the z-plane. Other bilinear transforms can be used to warp the frequency response of any discrete-time linear system (for example to approximate the non-linear frequency resolution of the human auditory system) and are implementable in the discrete domain by replacing a system's unit delays formula_6 with first order all-pass filters.\nThe transform preserves stability and maps every point of the frequency response of the continuous-time filter, formula_7 to a corresponding point in the frequency response of the discrete-time filter, formula_8 although to a somewhat different frequency, as shown in the Frequency warping section below. This means that for every feature that one sees in the frequency response of the analog filter, there is a corresponding feature, with identical gain and phase shift, in the frequency response of the digital filter but, perhaps, at a somewhat different frequency. This is barely noticeable at low frequencies but is quite evident at frequencies close to the Nyquist frequency.\nDiscrete-time approximation.\nThe bilinear transform is a first-order approximation of the natural logarithm function that is an exact mapping of the \"z\"-plane to the \"s\"-plane. When the Laplace transform is performed on a discrete-time signal (with each element of the discrete-time sequence attached to a correspondingly delayed unit impulse), the result is precisely the Z transform of the discrete-time sequence with the substitution of\nwhere formula_10 is the numerical integration step size of the trapezoidal rule used in the bilinear transform derivation; or, in other words, the sampling period. The above bilinear approximation can be solved for formula_11 or a similar approximation for formula_12 can be performed.\nThe inverse of this mapping (and its first-order bilinear approximation) is\nThe bilinear transform essentially uses this first order approximation and substitutes into the continuous-time transfer function, formula_1\nThat is\nStability and minimum-phase property preserved.\nA continuous-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. The bilinear transform maps the left half of the complex s-plane to the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane. Thus, filters designed in the continuous-time domain that are stable are converted to filters in the discrete-time domain that preserve that stability.\nLikewise, a continuous-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. Then the same mapping property assures that continuous-time filters that are minimum-phase are converted to discrete-time filters that preserve that property of being minimum-phase.\nGeneral transformation of a continuous-time IIR filter.\nConsider a continuous-time IIR filter of order formula_17\nwhere formula_19 and formula_20 are the transfer function poles and zeros in the s-plane.\nLet formula_21 (or if using frequency warping as described below, let \nformula_22).\nThe filter's bilinear transform is obtained by substituting formula_23:\nwhere formula_25, formula_26 are the z-plane pole and zero locations of the discretized filter,\nExample.\nAs an example take a simple low-pass RC filter. This continuous-time filter has a transfer function\nIf we wish to implement this filter as a digital filter, we can apply the bilinear transform by substituting for formula_29 the formula above; after some reworking, we get the following filter representation:\nThe coefficients of the denominator are the 'feed-backward' coefficients and the coefficients of the numerator are the 'feed-forward' coefficients used to implement a real-time digital filter.\nTransformation of a first-order continuous-time filter.\nIt is possible to relate the coefficients of a continuous-time, analog filter with those of a similar discrete-time digital filter created through the bilinear transform process. Transforming a general, first-order continuous-time filter with the given transfer function\nusing the bilinear transform (without prewarping any frequency specification) requires the substitution of\nwhere\nHowever, if the frequency warping compensation as described below is used in the bilinear transform, so that both analog and digital filter gain and phase agree at frequency formula_33, then\nThis results in a discrete-time digital filter with coefficients expressed in terms of the coefficients of the original continuous time filter:\nNormally the constant term in the denominator must be normalized to 1 before deriving the corresponding difference equation. This results in\nThe difference equation (using the Direct Form I) is\nTransformation of a second-order biquad.\nA similar process can be used for a general second-order filter with the given transfer function\nThis results in a discrete-time digital biquad filter with coefficients expressed in terms of the coefficients of the original continuous time filter:\nAgain, the constant term in the denominator is generally normalized to 1 before deriving the corresponding difference equation. This results in\nThe difference equation (using the Direct form I) is\nFrequency warping.\nTo determine the frequency response of a continuous-time filter, the transfer function formula_1 is evaluated at formula_43 which is on the formula_3 axis. Likewise, to determine the frequency response of a discrete-time filter, the transfer function formula_45 is evaluated at formula_46 which is on the unit circle, formula_5. The bilinear transform maps the formula_3 axis of the \"s\"-plane (of which is the domain of formula_1) to the unit circle of the \"z\"-plane, formula_5 (which is the domain of formula_45), but it is not the same mapping formula_52 which also maps the formula_3 axis to the unit circle. When the actual frequency of formula_54 is input to the discrete-time filter designed by use of the bilinear transform, then it is desired to know at what frequency, formula_55, for the continuous-time filter that this formula_54 is mapped to.\nThis shows that every point on the unit circle in the discrete-time filter z-plane, formula_58 is mapped to a point on the formula_59 axis on the continuous-time filter s-plane, formula_60. That is, the discrete-time to continuous-time frequency mapping of the bilinear transform is\nand the inverse mapping is\nThe discrete-time filter behaves at frequency formula_63 the same way that the continuous-time filter behaves at frequency formula_64. Specifically, the gain and phase shift that the discrete-time filter has at frequency formula_63 is the same gain and phase shift that the continuous-time filter has at frequency formula_66. This means that every feature, every \"bump\" that is visible in the frequency response of the continuous-time filter is also visible in the discrete-time filter, but at a different frequency. For low frequencies (that is, when formula_67 or formula_68), then the features are mapped to a \"slightly\" different frequency; formula_69.\nOne can see that the entire continuous frequency range\nis mapped onto the fundamental frequency interval\nThe continuous-time filter frequency formula_72 corresponds to the discrete-time filter frequency formula_73 and the continuous-time filter frequency formula_74 correspond to the discrete-time filter frequency formula_75\nOne can also see that there is a nonlinear relationship between formula_55 and formula_77 This effect of the bilinear transform is called frequency warping. The continuous-time filter can be designed to compensate for this frequency warping by setting formula_61 for every frequency specification that the designer has control over (such as corner frequency or center frequency). This is called pre-warping the filter design.\nIt is possible, however, to compensate for the frequency warping by pre-warping a frequency specification formula_79 (usually a resonant frequency or the frequency of the most significant feature of the frequency response) of the continuous-time system. These pre-warped specifications may then be used in the bilinear transform to obtain the desired discrete-time system. When designing a digital filter as an approximation of a continuous time filter, the frequency response (both amplitude and phase) of the digital filter can be made to match the frequency response of the continuous filter at a specified frequency formula_79, as well as matching at DC, if the following transform is substituted into the continuous filter transfer function. This is a modified version of Tustin's transform shown above.\nHowever, note that this transform becomes the original transform\nas formula_83.\nThe main advantage of the warping phenomenon is the absence of aliasing distortion of the frequency response characteristic, such as observed with Impulse invariance."}
{"id": "4631", "revid": "1012029774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4631", "title": "Brian Boitano", "text": "Brian Anthony Boitano (born October 22, 1963) is an American figure skater from Sunnyvale, California. He is the 1988 Olympic champion, the 1986 and 1988 World Champion, and the 1985\u20131988 U.S. National Champion. He turned professional following the 1988 season. He returned to competition in 1993 and competed at the 1994 Winter Olympics, where he placed sixth.\nEarly life.\nBrian Boitano was born in Mountain View, California, and as an adult has lived in San Francisco. Boitano is a graduate of Marian A. Peterson High School in Sunnyvale, California. He is of Italian American descent.\nFigure skating career.\nEarly career.\nBrian Boitano first made his mark on the international scene when he won the bronze medal at the 1978 World Junior Figure Skating Championships, beating future rival Brian Orser for that medal\nBoitano was known primarily as a jumper early in his career and he, along with several other skaters, helped push the technical envelope of men's skating. In 1982, Boitano became the first American to land a triple Axel. In 1987, he introduced his signature jump, the 'Boitano triple Lutz' in which the skater raises his left arm above his head. He attempted a quadruple jump throughout the 1986\u201387 season and at the 1988 World Figure Skating Championships, but did not cleanly land the jump; he double-footed the landing on two occasions.\nAt the 1983 World Championships, he became the first skater to ever land all six triple jumps in competition. Indeed, he would eventually include and successfully land eight triple jumps in his free skate program, the maximum number possible (see Zayak rule). He would jump two flip jumps and two triple Axels to compete with his rival, Brian Orser who jumped one triple flip and one triple Axel. It was not until his failure to defend his World title in 1987 that he focused specifically on improving his artistry. Towards this end, he worked with renowned choreographer Sandra Bezic.\nBoitano placed second at the 1984 United States Figure Skating Championships, earning himself a trip to the 1984 Winter Olympics. He placed 5th at the Olympics, setting the stage for his success over the next four years.\nWorld Champion.\nFollowing the 1984 Olympics, several skaters emerged as likely medal hopes following the retirement of Scott Hamilton.\nBoitano won the 1985 United States Figure Skating Championships, the first of his four titles. At the first World Championships of the post-Hamilton era in 1985, Alexander Fadeev won, with Brian Orser finishing 2nd and Boitano 3rd. He had injured tendons in his right ankle a few weeks before the 1986 U.S. Championships but went on to win his second national title. At the 1986 World Championships, Boitano took the title, while Fadeev had a disastrous free skate despite having been in an excellent position to win; Orser finished 2nd once again.\nDuring the 1986\u201387 season, Boitano had introduced two new elements to his programs: the 'Tano triple lutz and a quadruple toe loop, although he never succeeded in landing a clean quadruple jump in competition. The 1987 World Championships were held in Cincinnati, giving defending World champion Boitano a home-field advantage. The outcome of the event would set the tone for the 1988 Olympics. At Worlds, Boitano fell on his quadruple toe loop attempt and placed second.\nAfter losing the world title to Orser at home, Boitano and his coach Linda Leaver decided that some changes needed to be made if Boitano was to become the Olympic champion. Boitano had always been good at the technical requirements (\"The first mark\"), but he was weak on the artistic (\"the second mark\"). He was a self-described \"jumping robot.\" In order to help his growth as an artist, he hired choreographer Sandra Bezic to choreograph his programs for the 1987\u20131988 Olympic season.\nBezic choreographed two programs that featured clean lines and accentuated the skating abilities of the 5' 11\" Boitano. The short program was based on Giacomo Meyerbeer's ballet \"Les Patineurs\" in which Boitano plays a cocky young man showing off his tricks, using movements dating back to the 19th century. In one famous moment, Boitano wipes ice shavings, also called snow, off his skate blade and tosses it over his shoulder after landing a triple Axel combination. The free skating program was based on the film score, \"Napoleon\", detailing various phases of a soldier's life.\nBoitano debuted his new programs at 1987 Skate Canada, held in the Saddledome in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, the same venue in which he would compete against Brian Orser for the Olympic title three months later. Boitano's new programs were received with standing ovations by the audience. Although Orser won the competition, Boitano skated clean, landing seven triple jumps, including a footwork section into a jump. He did however pop his planned second triple Axel. Boitano, Leaver, and Bezic were so confident about the strength of Boitano's new programs that they omitted the quadruple toe loop, which if landed, could have put him a shoulder above Orser in technical merit.\nThe short program at the 1988 United States Figure Skating Championships proved to be a highlight. Boitano received marks of 6.0 from eight of the nine judges for presentation, the second mark. His free skate was flawed. Due to delays, he did not skate until after midnight. Still, Boitano won the competition, and went into the Olympics as the national champion (U.S.), as did Orser (Canadian).\n1988 Olympics: Battle of the Brians.\nGoing into the Olympics, Boitano and Brian Orser each had won a World title and each had an excellent, balanced repertoire, with Boitano being known as the slightly better technician and Orser as the better artist. Adding to the rivalry, Boitano and Orser were both performing military-themed programs. Boitano's was to the music of Napoleon.\nThe Battle of the Brians at the 1988 Winter Olympics was the highlight of Boitano's amateur career. Boitano and Orser were effectively tied going into the free skating portion of the event and whoever won that portion would win the event. Alexander Fadeev had won the compulsory figures section of the competition with Boitano second and Orser third. In the short program, Orser placed first and Boitano second. The free skating was, at the time, worth 50% of the score, and so Boitano's lead would not be enough to hold him in first place if he lost the free skate.\nBoitano skated a clean, technically excellent long program, with eight triple jumps, including two Axels, and a triple flip-triple toe loop combination. Landing his second triple Axel jump cleanly was probably a critical factor in the battle. Orser made one small mistake on a jump and omitted his planned second triple Axel. Boitano won the Battle in a 5\u20134 split. With his win, he became the first Olympic champion to land the full complement of six types of triple jumps. Boitano won the gold medal, wearing skates with American flag appliqu\u00e9s that are now part of the collections of the National Museum of American History at the Smithsonian Institution.\nFollowing the Olympics, both Orser and Boitano went to the World Championships, which Boitano won. Boitano turned professional soon after.\nProfessional career and return to amateur standing.\nFollowing the Olympics, Boitano went on to dominate competitions in the professional ranks, winning 10 straight professional competitions, including 5 consecutive World Professional Championship titles and 4 consecutive wins at the Challenge of Champions. Boitano also appeared in \"Carmen on Ice\", for which he won an Emmy. However, Boitano wanted to return to amateur competition and make another run at the Olympics.\nBoitano's lobby proved successful and in June 1993, the International Skating Union (ISU) introduced a clause, commonly known as the \"Boitano rule,\" which allowed professionals to reinstate as \"amateur\" or \"eligible\" skaters. This had been the result of Boitano's active involvement during the early 1990s, which saw professionals being allowed in the Olympic Games in the sports of tennis and basketball. Boitano reinstated as an amateur to compete in the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.\nBoitano competed at the 1994 United States Figure Skating Championships, led after the short program, but lost to Scott Davis in the long program in a 6\u20133 split decision. Boitano was named to the Olympic team. Going into the Olympics as a medal favorite in a strong field, Boitano missed his triple Axel combination during the short program for the first time in his career. This mistake proved extremely costly, and knocked Boitano out of medal contention. He skated a good long program and finished 6th.\nBoitano returned to the professional ranks afterwards. He was inducted into the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame and the United States Figure Skating Hall of Fame in 1996.\nPersonal life.\nIn December 2013, Boitano was named to the United States delegation to the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia. In conjunction with that appointment, Boitano publicly came out as gay. The Sochi games and Russia have been the targets of criticism and LGBT activism because of a Russian anti-gay \"propaganda\" law passed in June 2013. In January 2014, he told \"Associated Press\" that he had never wanted to come out until the delegation announcement.\nCelebrity and popular culture career.\n\"South Park\" song.\nA caricature of Boitano as a superhero appears as a semi-recurring character in the cartoon series \"South Park\". The film \"\" (1999), features a musical number titled \"What Would Brian Boitano Do?\". He was also featured in \"Jesus vs. Santa\".\nFood Network show.\nOn August 23, 2009, Food Network debuted a new series entitled \"What Would Brian Boitano Make?\", which borrows both its name and opening musical theme from the \"\" song. The show features Boitano preparing meals for his friends. The series was picked up for a ten-episode second season.\nOther television and film appearances.\nHe hosted a series on HGTV, called \"The Brian Boitano Project\", which premiered January 16, 2014, in which he purchased a near derelict ancestral home in Northern Italy, home to many Boitanos. During the series he gives the home in Favale di Malvaro a sympathetic restoration/renovation and shops flea markets with two nieces to find decor and furnishings. Local artisans, carpenters, masons and painters create a gem where he can live part-time and host Boitanos from afar."}
{"id": "4632", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4632", "title": "British Queen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4633", "revid": "40720853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4633", "title": "List of political scandals in the United Kingdom", "text": "Political scandals in the United Kingdom are commonly referred to by the press and commentators as \"'sleaze\".\nSleaze.\nA number of political scandals in the 1980s and 1990s created the impression of what was described in the British press as \"sleaze\": a perception that the then Conservative government was associated with political corruption and hypocrisy. This was revived in the late 1990s due to accounts of so-called \"sleaze\" by the Labour government.\nList of scandals.\n2000s.\nFollowing revelations about Dr Chai Patel and others who were recommended for peerages after lending the Labour party money, the Treasurer of the party, Jack Dromey said he had not been involved and did not know the party had secretly borrowed millions of pounds in 2005. He called on the Electoral Commission to investigate the issue of political parties taking out loans from non-commercial sources.\nIn November 2007, it emerged that more than \u00a3400,000 had been accepted by the Labour Party from one person through a series of third parties, causing the Electoral Commission to seek an explanation. Peter Watt resigned as the General Secretary of the party the day after the story broke and was quoted as saying that he knew about the arrangement but had not appreciated that he had failed to comply with the reporting requirements."}
{"id": "4634", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4634", "title": "Bombadier", "text": ""}
{"id": "4635", "revid": "23570705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4635", "title": "Bombardier Inc.", "text": "Bombardier Inc. () is a Canadian manufacturer of business jets. It was also formerly a manufacturer of commercial jets, public transport vehicles, trains, and recreational vehicles, with the last being spun-off as Bombardier Recreational Products. The company originally produced snowmobiles, over the years it expanded into the aviation, rail, and public transit businesses.\nBombardier manufactures several series of corporate jets, Global 7500, Global Express, Challenger 600, Challenger 300, and Learjet 70/75.\nHistory.\nBombardier Recreational Products.\nIn January 1934, a blizzard prevented Joseph-Armand Bombardier from reaching the nearest hospital in time to save his two-year-old son, Yvon, who died from appendicitis complicated by peritonitis.\nBombardier was a mechanic who dreamed of building a vehicle that could \"float on snow\". In 1935, in a repair shop in Valcourt, Quebec, he designed and produced the first snowmobile using a drive system he developed that revolutionized travel in snow and swampy conditions.\nIn 1937, he patented and sold 12 of the 7-passenger \"B7\" snow coaches. They were used in rural Quebec to take children to school, carry freight, deliver mail, and as ambulances. In 1941, Bombardier opened a factory in Valcourt.\nIn 1942, \"L'Auto-Neige Bombardier Limit\u00e9e\" (\"Bombardier Snow Car Limited\") was founded in Valcourt.\nDuring World War II, the Government of Canada issued wartime rationing regulations. Bombardier customers had to prove that snowmobiles were essential to their livelihood in order to buy one. The company then shifted its focus to the arms industry.\nIn 1947, during a blizzard in Saskatchewan, the company received positive press coverage when army snowmobiles resupplied isolated radio communication towers.\nIn 1948, the Government of Quebec passed a law requiring all roads to be cleared of snow; Bombardier's sales fell by nearly half in one year. Armand Bombardier therefore decided to diversify his business, first by producing tracked snowplows sized specifically for use on municipal sidewalks, replacing horse-drawn vehicles, then by making all-terrain vehicles for the mining, petroleum, and forestry industries.\nThe machines had removable front skis that could be replaced with front wheels for use on paved or hard surfaces, thus providing greater utility to his large snowmobiles. In 1951, the wooden bodies were replaced with sheet steel, and these vehicles were powered by Chrysler flathead six-cylinder engines and 3-speed manual transmissions.\nIn the early 1950s, Bombardier focused on developing a snowmobile for 1 or 2 passengers. A breakthrough occurred in 1957 when Bombardier developed a one-piece molded rubber continuous track with enough durability to provide snow-gripping traction for lightweight vehicles. The vehicle was called the \"Ski-Dog\" because it was meant to replace the dog sled for hunters and trappers. However, in 1958, \"Ski-Doo\" was accidentally painted on the first prototype, and immediately became the popular name.\nThe public soon discovered the great fun of speedy vehicles zooming over snow, and a new winter sport was born, centered in Quebec. In the first year, Bombardier sold 225 Ski-Doos; four years later, 8,210 were sold. Bombardier slowed promotion of the Ski-Doo line to prevent it from crowding out other company products, while still dominating the snowmobile industry against competitors Polaris Industries and Arctic Cat.\nIn 1963, Roski was created in Roxton Falls, Quebec as a manufacturer of composite parts for the Ski-Doo. In the 1960s, V-8 engines were added.\nOn February 18, 1964, J. Armand Bombardier died of cancer at age 56. Until then, he oversaw all areas of operation and controlled the research department, making all the drawings himself. The younger generation took over, led by Armand's sons and sons-in-law, reorganizing and decentralizing the company. The company adopted computer inventory, accounting, and billing. Distribution networks were improved and increased, and an incentive program was developed for sales staff. That year, a survey was mailed to Ski-Doo owners to find out how the product was being used. Germain Bombardier, who had been groomed by his father, took over the company upon his father's death in 1964. However, he quit and sold his shares in 1966 after a disagreement with other family members. Laurent Beaudoin, the son-in-law of the founder, then became president, a position he held until 1999.\nIn 1967, the company was renamed \"Bombardier Limited\". By that time, the snowmobiles were very useful for the Inuit.\nIn 1968, Clayton Jacobson II invented the jet ski and the company licensed his patents to create the Sea-Doo personal watercraft.\nOn January 23, 1969, the company became a public company, listing on the Montreal Exchange and the Toronto Stock Exchange.\nIn 1969\u20131970, the standard round windows reminiscent of portholes were replaced with larger rectangular windows that provided more interior light. A change was made to the Chrysler Industrial 318 engines with the automatic Loadflite transmissions.\nIn 1970, the company acquired Rotax, an engine manufacturer based in Gunskirchen, Austria.\nIn 1971, Bombardier acquired Moto-Ski. Also in 1971, Bombardier launched Operation SnoPlan, a program to promote snowmobile safety after a mounting death toll due to snowmobile accidents.\nIn the 1970s, the company began producing Can-Am motorcycles, which included Rotax engines.\nIn 2003, the company sold Bombardier Recreational Products to a group of investors: Bain Capital (50%), Bombardier Family (35%) and Caisse de d\u00e9p\u00f4t et placement du Qu\u00e9bec (15%) for $875 million.\nDivested lines of business.\nAviation.\nIn 1986, Bombardier acquired Canadair for C$120 million from the Government of Canada after it recorded the largest corporate loss in Canadian history.\nIn 1989, the company acquired Short Brothers.\nIn 1990, it acquired Learjet. In 1992, the company acquired de Havilland Canada from Boeing.\nIn 1995, the company founded Flexjet. In December 2013, the division was sold for $195 million.\nOn June 29, 2016, Bombardier delivered the first CSeries CS100 aircraft (now called the Airbus A220) to Swiss International Air Lines. Air Canada placed an order for the aircraft one day earlier.\nIn April 2016, Delta Air Lines placed an order for the aircraft. On September 26, 2017, after Boeing complained that Bombardier was selling the CS100 to Delta Air Lines below cost due to subsidies from the governments of Canada and Quebec, the United States Department of Commerce proposed a 219% tariff on the aircraft. Boeing's complaint stated that the CS100 planes were being sold at US$19.6 million each, below the US$33.2 million production cost. The governments of Canada and the United Kingdom threatened to stop ordering Boeing aircraft since the company was putting aerospace jobs at risk. On January 26, 2018 the United States International Trade Commission overturned the tariffs. Boeing did not appeal.\nIn July 2018, Airbus acquired a 50.01% stake in the CSeries for one Canadian dollar, with an option to acquire the remaining interest by 2024. Airbus built a second CSeries assembly line at its A320 assembly facility in Mobile, Alabama.\nIn November 2018, the company announced the sale of its turboprop passenger aircraft to an affiliate of Viking Air. It also announced 5,000 layoffs.\nIn March 2019, the company sold its Business Aircraft Training business to CAE Inc. for $645 million. The business included flight simulators and training devices for the Bombardier Learjet, Challenger, and Global product lines.\nOn 25 June 2019, Bombardier agreed with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries to sell the CRJ programme, a deal was expected to close in early 2020 subject to regulatory approval. Bombardier will retain the Mirabel assembly facility and produce the CRJ on behalf of Mitsubishi until the current order backlog is complete.\nIn October 2019 Bombardier announced the sale agreement of its remaining aerostructure division to US company Spirit AeroSystems. The division at time of sale involved component manufacture for new and after-market Bombardier group and Airbus group aircraft models, and also operated in aircraft maintenance, repair and overhaul. Due to how the 2020 pandemic affected the industry, the agreement was renegotiated with the sale to Spirit concluded finally in October 2020. Bombardier's former aerostructures division purchased by Spirit consisted at time of sale of operations in Belfast UK, Casablanca Morocco and Dallas USA.\nThe 2019-20 aerostructures division sell-off was described at the time as supporting Bombardier's \"strategic decision to reposition itself as a pure-play business aircraft company\".\nIn February 2020, Airbus acquired an additional 25% stake in the A220 for US$591 million. This transaction was the final step to get Bombardier Aviation out of the commercial jet industry.\nBombardier Capital.\nFrom 1973, when it was based in Colchester, Vermont, Bombardier Capital offered financial services such as lending and leasing.\nIn 1997, the company began transitioning some services to Jacksonville, Florida.\nIn 2001, it ceased taking on new consumer loans.\nIn 2005, Bombardier sold its inventory finance division to GE Commercial Finance.\nMilitary.\nThe company acquired the rights to the Volkswagen Iltis in 1981. Production ceased in 1989.\nWhen UTDC was acquired Bombardier in 1991 several military products were added: \nUTDC 24M32 - HLVW military trucks based on the Steyr 91 (Percheron)\nIn 2003, the company sold its arms industry division in Canada. Military Aviation Services was sold to SPAR Aerospace. Land-based arms industry products made by Urban Transportation Development Corporation ceased operations.\nPublic transport bus in Ireland.\nIn the late 1970s in the Republic of Ireland, CI\u00c9 (now Bus \u00c9ireann and Dublin Bus) commissioned a range of single and double-decker buses to be designed and produced.\nCI\u00c9 looked for partners to build these buses in Ireland, eventually finding two: Bombardier, and the United States-based General Automotive Corporation (GAC) from Ann Arbor, Michigan. The two companies formed a new company Bombardier Ireland Limited, 51% owned by Bombardier and 49% owned by GAC. In August 1983, Bombardier sold its shares to GAC, with the company renamed GAC Ireland Limited.\nThe prototypes were devised in Germany and production of 51 express coaches (KE type) and 366 double-decker buses (KD type) were assembled between 1980 and 1983 at a facility in Shannon, County Clare. They remained in service until 1997 and 2000 respectively. Some surviving examples are now exhibited at the National Transport Museum of Ireland at Howth Castle.\nRail equipment.\nThe company diversified into rail transport after the 1970s energy crisis reduced demand for snowmobiles.\nIn 1974, the company received its first order \u2013 to build MR-73 trains for Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de transport de Montr\u00e9al for use on the Montreal Metro.\nIn 1975, the company acquired Montreal Locomotive Works. It was sold to General Electric in 1988.\nIn 1982, the company won a contract from New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority to build 825 R62A cars for the New York City Subway for $663 million.\nIn 1985, the company ceased manufacturing locomotives and concentrated on producing passenger train rolling stock. It acquired a 45% stake in La Brugeoise et Nivelles (formerly BN Constructions Ferroviaires et M\u00e9talliques) based in Bruges in 1986, the assets of U.S. railcar manufacturers Budd Company and Pullman Company in 1987, and ANF Industrie based in Crespin, Nord, France in 1989. A series of acquisitions in the United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland, Canada, and Mexico further increased operations.\nIn 1996, the company was selected as the lead developer for the Acela Express trains, the fastest trains in North America, in a $710 million contract. Problems with the trains resulted in lawsuits between the company and Amtrak.\nIn 2001, Bombardier acquired Adtranz (DaimlerChrysler Rail Systems), a manufacturer of trains which were widely used throughout Germany and Great Britain, becoming one of the largest manufacturers of railway rolling stock in the world. This division produced the Bombardier Turbostar.\nIn 2005, it launched the Bombardier Zefiro high-speed rail, with speeds of 200\u2013380 kilometres per hour, for the Ministry of Railways (China).\nOn February 13, 2020 Alstom agreed to buy the Bombardier Transportation division for \u20ac7 billion. The acquisition deal completed on 29 January 2021.\nBombardier Museum.\nThe Museum of Ingenuity J. Armand Bombardier is a museum in Valcourt, Quebec dedicated to the life of Joseph-Armand Bombardier and the snowmobile industry. Opened in 1971, with substantial renovations in 1990, the museum is professionally curated and features a wide array of Ski-Doos, other industrial designs, and a selection of related books, booklets and other items of interest to snowmobile enthusiasts.\nThe museum includes the original garage \"factory\" where the first snowmobile was built. The garage was carefully removed from its original location in Valcourt and moved to its present site at the museum, which is located blocks away from the present-day Bombardier Recreational Products factory."}
{"id": "4636", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4636", "title": "Break key", "text": "The Break key of a computer keyboard refers to breaking a telegraph circuit and originated with 19th century practice. In modern usage, the key has no well-defined purpose, but while this is the case, it can be used by software for miscellaneous tasks, such as to switch between multiple login sessions, to terminate a program, or to interrupt a modem connection.\nBecause the break function is usually combined with the pause function on one key since the introduction of the IBM Model M 101-key keyboard in 1985, the Break key is also called the Pause key. It can be used to pause some computer games.\nHistory.\nA standard telegraph circuit connects all the keys, sounders and batteries in a single series loop. Thus the sounders actuate only when both keys are down (closed, also known as \"marking\" \u2014 after the ink marks made on paper tape by early printing telegraphs). So the receiving operator has to hold their key down or close a built-in shorting switch in order to let the other operator send. As a consequence, the receiving operator could interrupt the sending operator by opening their key, breaking the circuit and forcing it into a \"spacing\" condition. Both sounders stop responding to the sender's keying, alerting the sender. (A physical break in the telegraph line would have the same effect.)\nThe teleprinter operated in a very similar fashion except that the sending station kept the loop closed (logic 1, or \"marking\") even during short pauses between characters. Holding down a special \"break\" key opened the loop, forcing it into a continuous logic 0, or \"spacing\", condition. When this occurred, the teleprinter mechanisms continually actuated without printing anything, as the all-0s character is the non-printing \"NUL\" in both Baudot and ASCII. The resulting noise got the sending operator's attention.\nThis practice carried over to teleprinter use on time-sharing computers. A continuous spacing (logical 0) condition violates the rule that every valid character has to end with one or more logic 1 (marking) \"stop\" bits. The computer (specifically the UART) recognized this as a special \"break\" condition and generated an interrupt that typically stopped a running program or forced the operating system to prompt for a login. Although asynchronous serial telegraphy is now rare, the key once used with terminal emulators can still be used by software for similar purposes.\nSinclair.\nOn the Sinclair ZX80 and ZX81 computers, the Break is accessed by pressing . On the Sinclair ZX Spectrum it is accessed by . The Spectrum+ and later computers have a dedicated key. It does not trigger an interrupt but will halt any running BASIC program, or terminate the loading or saving of data to cassette tape. An interrupted BASIC program can usually be resumed with the codice_1 command. The Sinclair QL computer, without a key, maps the function to .\nBBC Micro.\nOn a BBC Micro computer, the key generates a hardware reset which would normally cause a warm restart of the computer. A cold restart is triggered by pressing . If a filing system is installed, will cause the computer to search for and load or run a file called codice_2 on the filing system's default device (e.g. floppy disk 0, network user BOOT). The latter two behaviours were inherited by the successor to Acorn MOS, RISC OS. These behaviours could be changed or exchanged in software, and were often used in rudimentary anti-piracy techniques.\nBecause of the BBC Micro's near universal usage in British schools, later versions of the machine incorporated a physical lock on the Break key to stop children from intentionally resetting the computer.\nModern keyboards.\nOn many modern PCs, interrupts screen output by BIOS until another key is pressed. This is effective during boot in text mode and in a DOS box in Windows safe mode with 50 lines. On early keyboards without a key (before the introduction of 101/102-key keyboards) the Pause function was assigned to , and the Break function to ; these key-combinations still work with most programs, even on modern PCs with modern keyboards. Pressing the dedicated key on 101/102-key keyboards sends the same scancodes as pressing , then , then releasing them in the reverse order would do; additionally, an E1hex prefix is sent, which enables 101/102-key-aware software to discern the two situations, while older software usually just ignores the prefix. The key is different from all other keys in that it sends no scancodes at all on release in PS/2 modes 1 or 2, so it is impossible to determine whether this key is being held down with older devices. In PS/2 mode 3 or USB HID mode, there is a release scancode, so it is possible to determine whether this key is being held down on modern computers.\nOn modern keyboards, the key is usually labeled \"Pause\" with \"Break\" below, sometimes separated by a line: , or \"Pause\" on the top of the keycap and \"Break\" on the front. In most Windows environments, the key combination brings up the system properties.\nKeyboards without Break key.\nCompact and notebook keyboards often do not have a dedicated key.\nThese may use the following substitutes for :\nSubstitutes for :\nFor some Dell laptops without a Break key press the ALT+Space bar and select \"Interrupt\". \nUsage for breaking the program's execution.\nWhile both and combination are commonly implemented as a way of breaking the execution of a console application, they are also used for similar effect in integrated development environments. Although these two are often considered interchangeable, compilers and execution environments usually assign different signals to these. Additionally, in some kernels (e.g. miscellaneous DOS variants) is detected only at the time OS tries reading from a keyboard buffer and only if it's the only key sequence in the buffer, while is often translated instantly (e.g. by INT 1Bh under DOS). Because of this, is usually a more effective choice under these operating systems; sensitivity for these two combinations can be enhanced by the codice_3 CONFIG.SYS statement."}
{"id": "4640", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4640", "title": "Bogie", "text": "A bogie ( ) (in some senses called a truck in North American English) is a chassis or framework that carries a wheelset, attached to a vehicle\u2014a modular subassembly of wheels and axles. Bogies take various forms in various modes of transport. A bogie may remain normally attached (as on many railroad cars and semi-trailers) or be quickly detachable (as the dolly in a road train or in railway bogie exchange); it may contain a suspension within it (as most rail and trucking bogies do), or be solid and in turn be suspended (as most bogies of tracked vehicles are); it may be mounted on a swivel, as traditionally on a railway carriage or locomotive, additionally jointed and sprung (as in the landing gear of an airliner), or held in place by other means (centreless bogies).\nWhile \"bogie\" is the preferred spelling and first-listed variant in various dictionaries, bogey and bogy are also used.\nRailway.\nA \"bogie\" in the UK, or a \"railroad truck\", \"wheel truck\", or simply \"truck\" in North America, is a structure underneath a railway vehicle (wagon, coach or locomotive) to which axles (and, hence, wheels) are attached through bearings. In Indian English, \"bogie\" may also refer to an entire railway carriage. In South Africa, the term \"bogie\" is often alternatively used to refer to a freight or goods wagon (shortened from \"bogie wagon\").\nThe first standard gauge British railway to build coaches with bogies, instead of rigidly mounted axles, was the Midland Railway in 1874.\nPurpose.\nBogies serve a number of purposes:\nUsually, two bogies are fitted to each carriage, wagon or locomotive, one at each end. Another configuration is often used in articulated vehicles, which places the bogies (often Jacobs bogies) under the connection between the carriages or wagons.\nMost bogies have two axles, but some cars designed for heavy loads have more axles per bogie. Heavy-duty cars may have more than two bogies using span bolsters to equalize the load and connect the bogies to the cars.\nUsually, the train floor is at a level above the bogies, but the floor of the car may be lower between bogies, such as for a bilevel rail car to increase interior space while staying within height restrictions, or in easy-access, stepless-entry, low-floor trains.\nComponents.\nKey components of a bogie include:\nThe connections of the bogie with the rail vehicle allow a certain degree of rotational movement around a vertical axis pivot (bolster), with side bearers preventing excessive movement. More modern, bolsterless bogie designs omit these features, instead taking advantage of the sideways movement of the suspension to permit rotational movement.\nExamples.\nCommonwealth bogie.\nThe Commonwealth bogie was manufactured by the English Steel Corporation under licence from the Commonwealth Steel Company in Illinois, United States. Fitted with SKF or Timken bearings, it was introduced in the late 1950s for all BR Mark 1 vehicles. It was a heavy, cast-steel design weighing about , with sealed roller bearings on the axle ends, avoiding the need to maintain axle box oil levels.\nThe leaf springs were replaced by coil springs (one per wheel) running vertically rather than horizontally. The advanced design gave a better ride quality than the BR1, being rated for .\nThe side frame of the bogie was usually of bar construction, with simple horn guides attached, allowing the axle boxes vertical movements between them. The axle boxes had a cast-steel equaliser beam or bar resting on them. The bar had two steel coil springs placed on it and the bogie frame rested on the springs. The effect was to allow the bar to act as a compensating lever between the two axles and to use both springs to soften shocks from either axle. The bogie had a conventional bolster suspension with swing links carrying a spring plank.\nB4 bogie.\nThe B4 bogie was introduced in 1963. It was a fabricated steel design versus cast iron and was lighter than the Commonwealth, weighing in at . It also had a speed rating of .\nAxle to spring connection was again fitted with roller bearings. However, now two coil springs rather than one were fitted per wheel.\nOnly a very small number of Mark 1 stock was fitted with the B4 bogie from new, it being used on the Mark 1 only to replace worn BR1 bogies. The British Rail Mark 2 coach, however, carried the B4 bogies from new. A heavier-duty version, the B5, was standard on Southern Region Mk1-based EMUs from the 1960s onwards. Some Mark 1 catering cars had mixed bogies\u2014a B5 under the kitchen end, and a B4 under the seating end. Some of the B4-fitted Mark 2s, as well as many B4-fitted Mark 1 BGs were allowed to run at with extra maintenance, particularly of the wheel profile, and more frequent inspection.\nBT10 bogie.\nThe BT10 bogie was introduced on the British Rail Mark 3 coach in the 1970s. Each wheel is separately connected to the bogie by a swing-arm axle.\nThere is dual suspension:\nLocomotives.\nDiesel and electric.\nModern diesel and electric locomotives are mounted on bogies. Those commonly used in the North America include Type A, Blomberg, HT-C and Flexicoil trucks.\nSteam.\nOn a steam locomotive, the leading and trailing wheels may be mounted on bogies like pony trucks or Bissel bogies. Articulated locomotives (e.g. Fairlie, Garratt or Mallet locomotives) have power bogies similar to those on diesel and electric locomotives.\nRollbock.\nA rollbock is a specialized type of bogie that is inserted under the wheels of a rail wagon/car, usually to convert for another track gauge. Transporter wagons carry the same concept to the level of a flatcar specialized to take other cars as its load.\nArchbar bogies.\nIn archbar or diamond frame bogies, the side frames are fabricated rather than cast.\nTramway.\nModern.\nTram bogies are much simpler in design because of their axle load, and the tighter curves found on tramways mean tram bogies almost never have more than two axles. Furthermore, some tramways have steeper gradients and vertical, as well as horizontal, curves, which means tram bogies often need to pivot on the horizontal axis, as well.\nSome articulated trams have bogies located under articulations, a setup referred to as a Jacobs bogie. Often, low-floor trams are fitted with nonpivoting bogies and many tramway enthusiasts see this as a retrograde step, as it leads to more wear of both track and wheels and also significantly reduces the speed at which a tram can round a curve.\nHistoric.\nIn the past, many different types of bogie (truck) have been used under tramcars (e.g. Brill, Peckham, maximum traction). A maximum traction truck has one driving axle with large wheels and one nondriving axle with smaller wheels. The bogie pivot is located off-centre, so more than half the weight rests on the driving axle.\nHybrid systems.\nThe retractable stadium roof on Toronto's Rogers Centre used modified off-the-shelf train bogies on a circular rail. The system was chosen for its proven reliability.\nRubber-tyred metro trains use a specialised version of railway bogies. Special flanged steel wheels are behind the rubber-tired running wheels, with additional horizontal guide wheels in front of and behind the running wheels, as well. The unusually large flanges on the steel wheels guide the bogie through standard railroad switches, and in addition keep the train from derailing in case the tires deflate.\nVariable gauge axles.\nTo overcome breaks of gauge some bogies are being fitted with variable gauge axles (VGA) so that they can operate on two different gauges. These include the SUW 2000 system from ZNTK Pozna\u0144.\nCleminson system.\nThe Cleminson system is not a true bogie, but serves a similar purpose. It was based on a patent of 1883 by James Cleminson, and was once popular on narrow-gauge rolling stock, e.g. on the Isle of Man and Manx Northern Railways. The vehicle would have three axles and the outer two could pivot to adapt to curvature of the track. The pivoting was controlled by levers attached to the third (centre) axle, which could slide sideways.\nTracked vehicles.\nSome tanks and other tracked vehicles have bogies as external suspension components (see armoured fighting vehicle suspension). This type of bogie usually has two or more road wheels and some type of sprung suspension to smooth the ride across rough terrain. Bogie suspensions keep much of their components on the outside of the vehicle, saving internal space. Although vulnerable to antitank fire, they can often be repaired or replaced in the field.\nArticulated bogie.\nAn articulated bogie is any one of a number of bogie designs that allow railway equipment to safely turn sharp corners, while reducing or eliminating the \"screeching\" normally associated with metal wheels rounding a bend in the rails. There are a number of such designs, and the term is also applied to train sets that incorporate articulation in the vehicle, as opposed to the bogies themselves.\nIf one considers a single bogie \"up close\", it resembles a small rail car with axles at either end. The same effect that causes the bogies to rub against the rails at longer radius causes each of the pairs of wheels to rub on the rails and cause the screeching. Articulated bogies add a second pivot point between the two axles (wheelsets) to allow them to rotate to the correct angle even in these cases.\nArticulated lorries (tractor-trailers).\nIn trucking, a bogie is the subassembly of axles and wheels that supports a semi-trailer, whether permanently attached to the frame (as on a single trailer) or making up the dolly that can be hitched and unhitched as needed when hitching up a second or third semi-trailer (as when pulling doubles or triples).\nRadial steering truck.\nRadial steering trucks, also known as radial bogies, allow the individual axles to align with curves in addition to the bogie frame as a whole pivoting. For non-radial bogies, the more axles in the assembly, the more difficulty it has negotiating curves, due to wheel flange to rail friction. For radial bogies, the wheel sets actively \"steer\" through curves, thus reducing wear at the wheel flange to rail interface and improving adhesion. This has been implemented both by EMD and GE. The EMD version, designated HTCR, was made standard equipment for the SD70 series, first sold in 1993. However, the HTCR in actual operation had mixed results and relatively high purchase and maintenance costs. Thus EMD introduced the HTSC truck in 2003, which basically is the HTCR stripped of radial components. GE introduced their version in 1995 as a buyer option for the AC4400CW and later Evolution Series locomotives. However it also met with limited acceptance due to relatively high purchase and maintenance costs, and customers have generally chosen GE Hi-Ad standard trucks for newer and rebuilt locomotives."}
{"id": "4641", "revid": "16655503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4641", "title": "British Steel (1967\u20131999)", "text": "British Steel was a major British steel producer. It originated from the nationalised British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed in 1967, which was privatised as a public limited company, British Steel plc, in 1988. It was once a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index. The company merged with Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group in 1999.\nHistory.\nAlasdair M. Blair (1997), Professor of International Relations and Head of the Department of Politics and Public Policy at De Montfort University, has explored the history of British Steel since the Second World War to evaluate the impact of government intervention in a market economy. He suggests that entrepreneurship was lacking in the 1940s; the government could not persuade the industry to upgrade its plants. For generations, the industry had followed a piecemeal growth pattern that proved relatively inefficient in the face of world competition.\nThe Labour Party came to power at the 1945 general election, pledging to bring several industries into state ownership. In 1946, it put the first steel development plan into practice with the aim of increasing capacity. It passed the Iron and Steel Act 1949, which meant nationalisation of the industry, as the government bought out the shareholders, and created the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain. American Marshall Plan aid in 1948\u201350 reinforced modernisation efforts and provided funding for them. However, the nationalisation was reversed by the Conservative government after 1952.\nThe industry was re-nationalised in 1967 under another Labour government, becoming British Steel Corporation (BSC). But by then, 20 years of political manipulation had left companies, such as British Steel, with serious problems: a complacency with existing equipment, plants operating below full capacity (hence the low efficiency), poor-quality assets, outdated technology, government price controls, higher coal and oil costs, lack of funds for capital improvement, and increasing competition on the world market.\nBy the 1970s, the Labour government's main goal for the declining industry was to keep employment high. Since British Steel was a major employer in depressed regions, it was decided to keep many mills and facilities operating at a loss. In the 1980s, Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher re-privatised BSC as British Steel. Under private control, the company dramatically cut its workforce and underwent a radical reorganisation and massive capital investment to again become competitive in the world marketplace.\nNationalisation.\nBSC was formed from the assets of former private companies which had been nationalised, largely under the Labour government of Harold Wilson, on 28 July 1967. Wilson's was the second attempt at nationalisation, the post-war government of Clement Attlee had created the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain in 1951 taking public ownership of 80 companies but this had been largely reversed by the following Conservative governments of the 1950s with only Britain's largest steel company, Richard Thomas and Baldwins, remaining in public ownership.\nBSC was established under the Iron and Steel Act 1967, which vested in the Corporation the shares of the fourteen major UK-based steel companies then in operation, being:\nAt the time of its formation, BSC comprised around ninety percent of the UK's steelmaking capacity; it had around 268,500 employees and around 200 wholly or partly-owned subsidiaries based in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Africa, South Asia, and South America.\nDorman Long, South Durham and Stewarts and Lloyds had merged as British Steel and Tube Ltd before vesting took place. BSC later arranged an exchange deal with Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd (GKN), the parent company of GKN Steel, under which BSC acquired Dowlais Ironworks at Merthyr Tydfil and GKN took over BSC's Brymbo Steelworks near Wrexham.\nRestructuring.\nAccording to Blair (1997), British Steel faced serious problems at the time of its formation, including obsolescent plants; plants operating under capacity and thus at low efficiency; outdated technology; price controls that reduced marketing flexibility; soaring coal and oil costs; lack of capital investment funds; and increasing competition on the world market. By the 1970s, the government adopted a policy of keeping employment high in the declining industry. This especially impacted BSC since it was a major employer in a number of depressed regions.\nOne of the arguments made in favour of nationalisation was that it would enable steel production to be rationalised. This involved concentrating investment on major integrated plants, placed near the coast for ease of access by sea, and closing older, smaller plants, especially those that had been located inland for proximity to coal supplies.\nFrom the mid-1970s, British Steel pursued a strategy of concentrating steelmaking in five areas: South Wales, South Yorkshire, Scunthorpe, Teesside and Scotland. This policy continued following the Conservative victory at the 1979 general election. Other traditional steelmaking areas faced cutbacks. Under the Labour government of James Callaghan, a review by Lord Beswick had led to the reprieve of the so-called 'Beswick plants', for social reasons, but subsequent governments were obliged under EU rules to withdraw subsidies. Major changes resulted across Europe, including in the UK:\nPrivatisation.\nThe Conservative manifesto for the 1987 general election noted that \"British Steel has more than doubled its productivity since 1979 and made a profit last year for the first time in over ten years.\"\nFollowing Margaret Thatcher's re-election, on 3 December 1987 the Conservative government formally announced in a statement by Kenneth Clarke, Minister of State for Trade and Industry, that it intended to privatise the British Steel Corporation.\nOn 5 September 1988 the assets, rights and liabilities of British Steel Corporation were transferred to British Steel plc, registered under the Companies Act as company number 2280000, by the British Steel Act 1988.\nThe government retained a special share which carried no voting rights but until 31 December 1993, permitted the government to stop any one party controlling more than 15% of the shares.\nBritish Steel employees were given a free allocation of shares, and offered two free shares for each they purchased up to \u00a3165, discounted shares up to \u00a32,200, and priority on applying for shares up to \u00a310,000.\nDealing in shares opened on the London Stock Exchange on 5 December 1988.\nPost-privatisation.\nThe privatised company later merged with the Dutch steel producer Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group on 6 October 1999. Corus itself was taken over in March 2007 by the Indian steel operator Tata Steel.\nChairmen.\nIan MacGregor later became famous for his role as Chairman of the National Coal Board during the UK miners' strike (1984\u20131985). During the strike the \"Battle of Orgreave\" took place at British Steel's coking plant.\nSponsorships.\nIn 1971 British Steel sponsored Sir Chay Blyth in his record-making non-stop circumnavigation against the winds and currents, known as 'The Impossible Voyage'. In 1992 they sponsored the British Steel Challenge, the first of a series of 'wrong way' races for amateur crews.\nBritish Steel had agreed a sponsorship deal with Middlesbrough Football Club during the 1994\u201395 season, with a view to British Steel-sponsored Middlesbrough shirts making their appearance the following season. But the sponsorship deal was terminated before it commenced after it was revealed that British steel only made up a tiny fraction of steel used in construction of the stadium, and that the bulk of the steel had been imported from Germany.\nIn popular culture.\nThe English rock band XTC mentioned British Steel in their 1979 song Making Plans for Nigel."}
{"id": "4642", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4642", "title": "BT Group", "text": "BT Group plc (trading as BT and formerly British Telecom) is a British multinational telecommunications holding company headquartered in London, United Kingdom. It has operations in around 180 countries and is the largest provider of fixed-line, broadband and mobile services in the UK, and also provides subscription television and IT services.\nBT's origins date back to the founding in 1846 of the Electric Telegraph Company, the world's first public telegraph company, which developed a nationwide communications network. BT Group as it came to be started in 1912, when the General Post Office, a government department, took over the system of the National Telephone Company becoming the monopoly telecoms supplier in the United Kingdom. The Post Office Act of 1969 led to the GPO becoming a public corporation. The \"British Telecom\" brand was introduced in 1980, and became independent of the Post Office in 1981, officially trading under the name. British Telecommunications was privatised in 1984, becoming \"British Telecommunications plc\", with some 50 percent of its shares sold to investors. The Government sold its remaining stake in further share sales in 1991 and 1993. BT is a Royal Warrant holder of the British Royal Family and has a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange, a secondary listing on the New York Stock Exchange, and is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.\nBT controls a number of large subsidiaries. BT Global Services division supplies telecoms services to corporate and government customers worldwide, and its BT Consumer division supplies telephony, broadband, and subscription television services in the United Kingdom to around 18\u00a0million customers.\nHistory.\nA number of privately owned telegraph companies operated in Britain from 1846 onwards. Among them were:\nThe Telegraph Act 1868 passed the control of all these to the newly formed GPO (General Post Office)'s Postal Telegraphs Department.\nWith the invention of the telephone by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876 the GPO began to provide telephone services from some of its telegraph exchanges. In 1882 the Postmaster-General, Henry Fawcett started to issue licences to operate a telephone service to private businesses and the telephone system grew under the GPO in some areas and private ownership in others. The GPO's main competitor, the National Telephone Company, emerged in this market by absorbing other private telephone companies, prior to its absorption into the GPO in 1912.\nThe trunk network was unified under GPO control in 1896 and the local distribution network in 1912. A few municipally owned services remained outside of GPO control. These were Kingston upon Hull, Portsmouth and Guernsey. Hull still retains an independent operator, Kingston Communications, though it is no longer municipally controlled.\nIn 1969 the GPO, a government department, became the Post Office, a nationalised industry separate from government. Post Office Telecommunications was one of the divisions.\nFormation of British Telecom.\nThe \"British Telecom\" brand was introduced in 1980. On 1 October 1981, this became the official name of Post Office Telecommunications, which became a state-owned corporation independent of the Post Office under the provisions of the British Telecommunications Act 1981. In 1982 BT's monopoly on telecommunications was broken with the granting of a licence to Mercury Communications.\nPrivatisation.\nOn 19 July 1982, the Government announced its intention to sell shares in British Telecom to the public. On 1 April 1984, British Telecommunications was incorporated as a public limited company (plc) in anticipation of the passing of the Telecommunications Bill. This Bill received Royal Assent on 12 April, and the transfer to British Telecommunications plc from British Telecom as a statutory corporation of its business, its property, its rights and liabilities took place on 6 August 1984.\nAccording to Jacob Ward, the privatization of British Telecom was a \"landmark moment for neoliberalism.\" It became a model for other countries that sold their state utilities. Planners in the Long Range Planning Department used new computer models to support the transition of telecommunications and more generally the dramatic move from social democracy to neoliberalism, from monopoly to market. The telecommunications network was essential to plans for the digitalization of the economy. Computer simulations were needed to support neoliberalism, both as a managerial tool that could simulate free markets, as well as a technology that enabled the contraction of the government\u2019s role in the private sector.\nInitially all shares in the new plc were owned by the Government. In November 1984, 50.2% of the new company was offered for sale to the public and employees. Shares were listed in London, New York, and Toronto and the first day of trading on was 3 December 1984. The Government sold half its remaining interest in December 1991 and the other half in July 1993. In July 1997, the new Labour Government relinquished its Special Share (\"Golden Share\"), retained at the time of the flotation, which had effectively given it the power to block a takeover of the company, and to appoint two non-executive directors to the Board.\nThe company changed its trading name to \"BT\" on 2 April 1991. In 1996 Peter Bonfield was appointed CEO and Chairman of the Executive Committee, promising a \"rollercoaster ride\".\nIn the 1990s, BT entered the Irish telecommunications market through a joint venture with the Electricity Supply Board, the Irish state owned power provider. This venture, entitled Ocean, found its main success through the launch of Ireland's first subscription-free dial-up ISP, oceanfree.net. As a telecoms company it found much less success, mainly targeting corporate customers. BT acquired 100% of this venture in 1999.\nBT's attempted global alliances.\nMCI.\nIn June 1994 BT and MCI Communications launched Concert Communications Services which was a $1 billion joint venture between the two companies. Its aim was to build a network which would provide easy global connectivity to multinational corporations.\nThis alliance progressed further on 3 November 1996 when the two companies announced that they had agreed to a merger, creating a global telecommunications company called Concert plc. The proposal gained approval from the European Commission, the US Department of Justice, and the US Federal Communications Commission and looked set to proceed.\nHowever, in light of pressure from investors reacting to the slide in BT's share price on the London Stock Exchange, BT reduced its bid price for MCI, releasing MCI from its exclusivity clause and allowing it to speak to other interested parties. On 1 October 1997, Worldcom made a rival bid for MCI which was followed by a counter-bid from GTE.\nBT sold its stake in MCI to Worldcom in 1998 for \u00a34,159 million. As part of the deal, BT also bought out from MCI its 24.9% interest in Concert Communications, thereby making Concert a wholly owned part of BT.\nThe reaction to the failure of the deal in the City of London was critical of then Chairman Iain Vallance and CEO Peter Bonfield, and the lack of confidence from the failed merger led to their removal.\nAT&amp;T.\nAs BT now owned Concert, and still wanted access to the North American market, it needed a new partner. An AT&amp;T/BT option had been mooted in the past, but stopped on regulatory grounds due to their individual virtual monopolies in their home markets. By 1996, this had receded to the point where a deal was possible and a deal was consummated in 1998.\nAt its height, the Concert managed network was extensive. Although Concert continued signing customers, its rate of revenue growth slowed, so that in 1999 David Dorman was made CEO with a brief to revive it.\nIn late 2000 the BT and AT&amp;T boards fell-out \u2013 partly due to each partner's excess debt, and the resulting board room clear-outs \u2013 partly due to Concert's extensive annual losses. AT&amp;T recognized that Concert was a threat to its ambitions if left intact, and so negotiated a deal where Concert was split in two in 2001: North America and Eastern Asia went to AT&amp;T, the rest of the world and $400M to BT. BT's remaining Concert assets were merged into its BT Ignite, later BT Global Services group.\nBT Ireland.\nIn 2000, BT acquired Esat Telecom Group plc, and all its subsidiary companies, and Ireland On Line. It also purchased Telenor's minority shareholding in Esat Digifone. The Esat Telecom Group was split in two with the landline and internet operations were combining with Ocean to become part of BT Ignite. Esat Group was renamed Esat BT in July 2002, and eventually BT Ireland in April 2005. Esat Digifone became part of BT Wireless, before being spun off into a separate independent company mmo2 plc (now Telef\u00f3nica Europe). EsatBT installed the first DSL lines in Ireland, to try and compete heavily with former state telecoms company Eircom and operate one exchange, in Limerick.\n2001 debt crisis.\nBy 2001, BT had a debt of \u00a330 billion, much of which was acquired during the bidding round for the 3rd generation mobile telephony (commonly known as 3G) licences. It had also failed in its series of proposed global mergers, and the funds flowing from its then virtual monopoly of the UK market place had been largely removed. It was also headed by two executives who had little support from the London Stock Exchange, particularly in light of a 60% drop in share price in sixteen months.\nPhilip Hampton joined as CFO, and in April 2001 Sir Iain Vallance was replaced as Chairman by recognised turn around expert Sir Christopher Bland.\nEurope's largest rights issue.\nIn May 2001 BT carried out corporate Europe's largest ever rights issue, allowing it to raise \u00a35.9 billion. A few days before, it sold stakes in Japan Telecom, in mobile operator J-Phone Communications, and in Airtel of India to Vodafone.\nSale of Yell Group and demerger of O2.\nIn June 2001 BT's directory business was sold as Yell Group to a combination of private equity firms Apax Partners and Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst for \u00a32.1 billion.\nA demerger followed in November 2001, when the former mobile telecommunications business of BT, BT Cellnet, was hived off as a separate business named \"mmO2\". This included BT owned or operated networks in other countries, including BT Cellnet (UK), Esat Digifone (Ireland), and Viag Interkom (Germany). All networks now owned or operated by mmO2 (except Manx Telecom) were renamed as O2. The de-merger was accomplished via a share-swap, all British Telecommunications plc shareholders received one mmO2 plc and one BT Group plc (of which British Telecommunications is now a wholly owned subsidiary) share for each share they owned. British Telecommunications plc was de-listed on 16 November, and the two new companies started trading on 19 November.\nAftermath.\nAt the end of the series of sales, in October 2001 Sir Peter Bonfield resigned, and was replaced by former Lucent CEO Ben Verwaayen.\nDuring Bonfield's tenure the share price went from \u00a34 to \u00a315, and back again to \u00a35. Bonfield's salary to 31 March 2001 was a basic of \u00a3780,000 (increasing to \u00a3820,000) plus a \u00a3481,000 bonus and \u00a350,000 of other benefits including pension. He also received a deferred bonus, payable in shares three years' later, of \u00a3481,000, and additional bonuses of \u00a33.3 million.\nmmO2 plc was replaced by O2 plc in a further share-swap in 2005, and subsequently bought in an agreed takeover by Telef\u00f3nica for \u00a318 billion and delisted. In 2004, BT launched Consult 21, a consultation organisation that was to aid BT 21CN in the eventual conversion to digital telephony.\nIn 2004, BT was awarded the contract to deliver and manage N3, a secure and fast broadband network for the NHS National Programme for IT (NPfIT) program, on behalf of the English National Health Service (NHS).\nIn 2005 BT made a number of acquisitions. In February 2005, BT acquired Infonet (now re-branded BT Infonet), a large telecoms company based in El Segundo, California, giving BT access to new geographies. It also acquired the Italian company Albacom. Then in April 2005, it bought Radianz from Reuters (now rebranded as BT Radianz), which expanded BT's coverage and provided BT with more buying power in certain countries.\nIn August 2006, BT acquired online electrical retailer Dabs.com for \u00a330.6\u00a0million. The BT Home Hub manufactured by Inventel was also launched in June 2006.\nIn October 2006, BT confirmed that it would be investing 75% of its total capital spending, put at \u00a310\u00a0billion over five years, in its new Internet Protocol (IP) based 21st century network (21CN). Annual savings of \u00a31\u00a0billion per annum were expected when the transition to the new network was to have been completed in 2010, with over 50% of its customers to have been transferred by 2008. That month the first customers on to 21CN was successfully tested at Adastral Park in Suffolk.\n2007 to 2012.\nIn January 2007, BT acquired Sheffield-based ISP, PlusNet plc, adding 200,000 customers. BT stated that PlusNet will continue to operate separately out of its Sheffield head-office. On 1 February 2007, BT announced agreed terms to acquire International Network Services Inc. (INS), an international provider of IT consultancy and software.\nIn February 2007, Sir Michael Rake succeeded Sir Christopher Bland. In April that year, they acquired COMSAT International, followed in October by the acquisition of Lynx Technology.\nBT acquired Wire One Communications in June 2008 and folded the company into \"BT Conferencing\", its existing conferencing unit, as a new video business unit\nIn July 2008, BT acquired the online business directory firm Ufindus for \u00a320\u00a0million in order to expand its position in the local information market in GB. On 28 July 2008, BT acquired Ribbit, of Mountain View, California, \"Silicon Valley's First Phone Company\". Ribbit provides Adobe Flash/Flex APIs, allowing web developers to incorporate telephony features into their software as a service (SaaS) applications.\nIn the early days of its fibre broadband rollout, BT said it would deliver fibre-to-the-premises (FTTP) to around 25% of the Country, with the rest catered for by the slower fibre-to-the-cabinet (FTTC), which uses copper wiring to deliver the final stretch of the connection. In 2014, with less than 0.7% of the company's fibre network being FTTP, BT dropped the 25% target, saying that it was \"far less relevant today\" because of improvements made to the headline speed of FTTC, which had doubled to 80Mbit/s since its fibre broadband rollout was first announced. To supplement FTTC, BT offered an 'FTTP on Demand' product. In January 2015, BT stopped taking orders for the on-demand product.\nOn 1 April 2009, BT Engage IT was created from the merger of two previous BT acquisitions, Lynx Technology and Basilica. Apart from the name change not much else changed in operations for another 12 months. On 14 May 2009, BT said it was cutting up to 15,000 jobs in the coming year after it announced its results for the year to 31 March 2009. Then in July 2009, BT offered workers a long holiday for an up front sum of 25% of their annual wage or a one-off payment of \u00a31000 if they agree to go part-time.\nOn 6 April 2011, BT launched the first online not-for-profit fundraising service for UK charities called BT MyDonate as part of its investment to the community. The service will pass on 100% of all donations made through the site to the charity, and unlike other services which take a proportion as commission and charge charities for using their services, BT will only pass on credit/debit card charges for each donation. The service allows people to register to give money to charity or collect fundraising donations. BT developed MyDonate with the support of Cancer Research UK, Changing Faces, KidsOut, NSPCC and Women's Aid.\n2013 to present.\nIn March 2013, BT was allocated 4G spectrum in the UK following an auction and assignment by Ofcom, after paying \u00a3201.5m.\nOn 1 August 2013, BT launched its first television channels, BT Sport, to compete with rival broadcaster Sky Sports. Plans for the channels' launch came about when it was announced in June 2012 that BT had been awarded a package of broadcast rights for the Premier League from the 2013\u201314 to 2015\u201316 season, broadcasting 38 matches from each season. In February 2013, BT acquired ESPN Inc.'s UK and Ireland TV channels, continuing its expansion into sports broadcasting. ESPN America and ESPN Classic were both closed, while ESPN continued to be operated by BT. On 9 November 2013, BT announced it had acquired exclusive rights to the Champions League and Europa League for \u00a3897m, from the 2015 season, with some free games remaining including both finals.\nOn 1 November 2014, BT created a new central business services (CBS) organisation to provide customer services and improve operational efficiency levels.\nOn 24 November 2014, shares in BT rose considerably on the announcement that the company was in talks to buy back O2, while at the same time confirmed it was also in talks to acquire EE. BT subsequently entered into exclusive talks to buy EE for \u00a312.5\u00a0billion on 15 December 2014 and confirmed on 5 February 2015, subject to regulatory approval. The deal will combine BT's 10 million retail customers and EE's 24.5\u00a0million direct mobile subscribers. Deutsche Telekom will own 12% of BT, while Orange S.A. will own 4%.\nIn March 2015, launched a 4G service as BT Mobile BT Group CEO Gavin Patterson announced that BT plans to migrate all of its customers onto the IP network by 2025, switching off the company's ISDN network.\nOn 15 January 2016, BT received final unconditional approval by the Competition and Markets Authority to acquire EE. The deal was officially completed on 29 January 2016 with Deutsche Telekom now owning 12% of BT, while Orange S.A. own 4%.\nOn 1 February 2016, BT announced a new organisational structure that will take effect from April 2016 following the successful acquisition of EE. The EE brand, network and high street stores will be retained and will become a second consumer division, operating alongside BT Consumer. It will serve customers with mobile services, broadband and TV and will continue to deliver the Emergency Services Network contract which was awarded to EE in late 2015. There will be a new BT Business and Public Sector division that will have around \u00a35bn of revenues and will serve small and large businesses as well as the public sector in the UK and Ireland. It will comprise the existing BT Business division along with EE's business division and those parts of BT Global Services that are UK focused. There will also be another new division; BT Wholesale and Ventures that will comprise the existing BT Wholesale division along with EE's MVNO business as well as some specialist businesses such as Fleet, Payphones and Directories. Gerry McQuade, currently Chief Sales and Marketing Officer, Business at EE, will be its CEO.\nOn 8 June 2017, BT appointed KPMG as its new auditor to replace PwC in the wake of the fraud scandal in Italy that triggered a major profit warning earlier that year. Also in of that year, KPMG fired six US employees over a scandal that calls into question efforts to ensure that public company accounts are being properly scrutinised.\nOn 8 July 2017, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that BT \"has called in consultants from McKinsey to conduct a review of its businesses in the hope of saving hundreds of millions of pounds per year. The work, dubbed 'Project Novator', is understood to include a potential merger of BT's struggling global services corporate networking and IT unit with its business and public sector division\".\nOn 28 July 2017, BT announced organisational changes to \"simplify its operating model, strengthen accountabilities and accelerate its transformation\" and involves bringing together its BT Consumer and EE divisions into a new unified BT Consumer division that will operate across three brands \u2013 BT, EE and Plusnet. It will take effect from 1 April 2018.\nOn 18 April 2018, BT announced further organisational changes following unification of its BT Consumer and EE divisions, and involves bringing together its BT Business and Public Sector and BT Wholesale and Ventures divisions into a new unified division known as \"BT Enterprise\". It will also include BT's Ventures business which \"acts as an incubator for potential new growth areas of the company\" and will report as a single unit from 1 October 2018.\nOperations.\nBT Group is a holding company; the majority of its businesses and assets are held by its wholly owned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc. BT's businesses are operated under special government regulation by the British telecoms regulator Ofcom (formerly Oftel). BT has been found to have significant market power in some markets following market reviews by Ofcom. In these markets, BT is required to comply with additional obligations such as meeting reasonable requests to supply services and not to discriminate.\nBT runs the telephone exchanges, trunk network and local loop connections for the vast majority of British fixed-line telephones. Currently BT is responsible for approximately 28\u00a0million telephone lines in GB. Apart from KCOM Group, which serves Kingston upon Hull, BT is the only UK telecoms operator to have a \"Universal service Obligation,\" (USO) which means it must provide a fixed telephone line to any address in the UK. It is also obliged to provide public call boxes.\nAs well as continuing to provide service in those traditional areas in which BT has an obligation to provide services or is closely regulated, BT has expanded into more profitable products and services where there is less regulation. These are principally, broadband internet service and bespoke solutions in telecommunications and information technology.\nCorporate affairs.\nBuildings and facilities.\nAs BT operates in around 180 countries, it owns and leases a range of buildings and facilities in the UK and around the world. In 2001, it sold some of its UK property portfolio for \u00a32.38\u00a0billion to Telereal Trillium in a 30-year leaseback. The deal included 6,700 properties and contributed towards alleviating its debt at the time, with the main advantage being flexibility as it allows BT to vacate property over time, so as to adapt to changing operational requirements.\nHeadquarters.\nBT Group's world headquarters and registered office is the BT Centre, a 10-storey office building at 81 Newgate Street in the City of London, opposite St. Paul's tube station.\nBuildings and stations.\nSome of its UK buildings and stations are:\nTelecommunications towers.\nBT remains one of the largest owners of telecommunications towers in the UK and were a major node in its microwave network. Its BT Tower in London is notable for numerous reasons such as being the tallest building in the UK from its construction in the 1960s until the early 1980s, its revolving restaurant at the top known as 'Top of the Tower' in operation through the late 1960s and 1970s, and remains one of the UK's most important communications nerve centres, the heart of a vast broadcasting and communications network. It carries approximately 95% of the UK's TV content, including live broadcasts and 99% of all live football games as well as pioneering the first international HD, 3D and 4K television transmissions. It serves media production and distribution customers around the world and as part of the Things Connected Network launched in London, it became the highest building in the world to host an Internet of things (IoT) base station in September 2016. Some of its towers are:\nOther.\nSome of its other UK facilities are:\nDivisions.\nBT Group is organised into the following divisions:\nCorporate governance.\nBT's current board of directors as of November 2018:\nBT's current executive committee as of March 2018:\nPension fund.\nBT has the second largest defined benefit pension plan of any UK public company. The trustees valued the scheme at \u00a336.7\u00a0billion at the end of 2010; an actuarial valuation valued the deficit of the scheme at \u00a39.043\u00a0billion as of 31 December 2008.\nFollowing a change in the regulations governing inflation index linking, the deficit was estimated at \u00a35.2\u00a0billion in November 2010.\nSponsorships.\nBT sponsored Scotland's domestic rugby union championship and cup competitions between 1999 and 2006.\nOn 31 July 2012, it was announced that BT agreed a three-year sponsorship deal with Ulster Rugby and sees BT become the Official Communications Partner. BT's logo will appear on the Ulster Rugby shirt sleeve for all friendlies, Heineken Cup and RaboDirect Pro12 matches as well as a significant brand presence at their home ground; Ravenhill Stadium.\nOn 29 July 2013, it was announced that BT had partnered up with Scottish Rugby Union in a four-year sponsorship deal with its two professional clubs; Edinburgh Rugby and Glasgow Warriors that will commence from August 2013. The deal involves BT Sport becoming the new shirt sponsor for both clubs as well as being promoted with BT Group at their respective home grounds; Scotstoun Stadium and Murrayfield Stadium.\nOn 28 May 2014, it was announced that BT agreed a \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union which includes BT securing the naming rights for Murrayfield Stadium which becomes BT Murrayfield Stadium, become sponsor of the Scotland sevens team, become principal and exclusive sponsor of Scotland's domestic league and cup competitions from next season, taking over the role from The Royal Bank of Scotland and become sponsor of Scottish Rugby's four new academies that aims to drive forward standards for young players who have aspirations to play professionally.\nOn 14 April 2015, it was announced that as part of BT's current \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union that was announced in May 2014, BT has completed its sponsorship portfolio following an additional investment of \u00a33.6\u00a0million for the 3 years remaining of its sponsorship deal, to become the new shirt sponsor for the Scotland national teams.\nOn 27 January 2016, it was announced that BT, alongside YouTube will be the new joint headline sponsors in a three-year deal with Edinburgh International Television Festival. The two companies will \"share prominence across all branding of the 41st TV Festival, including the famous MacTaggart Lecture and will work closely with the festival organisers in their bid to reflect new trends in a rapidly transforming industry, from new ways of distributing content to technical innovations such as Virtual Reality\".\nBT is the founding and principal partner of the Wayne Rooney Foundation, which was established to improve the lives of children and young people. The Foundation will run events \"to raise vital funds to support the work of key organisations dedicated to supporting disadvantaged and vulnerable children and young people\". These organisations are four chosen charities which are, Manchester United Foundation, NSPCC, Claire House Children's Hospice and Alder Hey Children's Hospital. The first of these events was Wayne's testimonial match in August 2016 between Manchester United F.C. and Everton F.C. which raised \u00a31.2\u00a0million. The match was screened live through BT Sport with BT MyDonate being the official fundraising platform for the testimonial, with both online and text options for donations promoted during the match.\nOn 26 May 2017, it was announced that BT is to sponsor the 2017 British Urban Film Festival (BUFF) and sees BT host every event of the film festival, including the Awards at the BT Tower. BT will also broadcast the awards ceremony on BT.com and will have the opportunity to screen films acquired from the festival on its BT TV store platform.\nOn 6 September 2017, it was announced that BT had extended its current \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union that was announced in May 2014, for a further three years beginning from June 2018. The new deal sees BT retain the naming rights to BT Murrayfield Stadium, alongside its role as principal partner of the Scotland national team and Scotland 7s. BT's logo will continue to be displayed on the front of Scotland rugby shirts across the world, in the Six Nations Championship, as well as the summer and autumn test matches. BT will also continue to be promoted at Edinburgh Rugby and Scotstoun Stadium in Glasgow.\nHistorical financial performance.\nBT's financial results have been as follows:\nControversies.\nWorld Wide Web hyperlink patent.\nIn 2001, BT discovered it owned a patent () which it believed gave it patent rights on the use of hyperlink technology on the World Wide Web. The corresponding UK patent had already expired, but the US patent was valid until 2006. On 11 February 2002, BT began a court case relating to its claims in a US federal court against the Internet service provider Prodigy Communications Corporation. In the case \"British Telecommunications plc v. Prodigy\", the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled on 22 August 2002 that the BT patent was not applicable to web technology and granted Prodigy's request for summary judgment of non-infringement.\nBehavioural targeting.\nIn early 2008 it was announced that BT had entered into a contract (along with Virgin Media and TalkTalk) with the spyware company Phorm (responsible under their 121Media guise for the Apropos rootkit) to intercept and analyse their users' click-stream data and sell the anonymised aggregate information as part of Phorm's OIX advertising service. The practice, known as \"behavioural targeting\" and condemned by critics as \"data pimping\", came under intense fire from various internet communities and other interested-parties who believe that the interception of data without the consent of users and web site owners is illegal under UK law (RIPA). At a more fundamental level, many have argued that the ISPs and Phorm have no right to sell a commodity (a user's data, and the copyrighted content of web sites) to which they have no claim of ownership. In response to questions about Phorm and the interception of data by the Webwise system Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the creator of the World Wide Web, indicated his disapproval of the concept and is quoted as saying of his data and web history:\nHuawei infrastructure access.\nBeginning in 2010 the UK intelligence community investigated Huawei, the Chinese supplier of BT's new fibre infrastructure with increasing urgency after the United States, Canada and Australia prevented the company from operating in their countries. Although BT had notified the UK government in 2003 of Huawei's interest in their \u00a310bn network upgrade contract, they did not raise the security implications as BT failed to explain that the Chinese company would have unfettered access to critical infrastructure. On 16 December 2012 the prime minister David Cameron was supplied with an in-depth report indicating that the intelligence services had very grave doubts regarding Huawei, and that UK governmental, military, and civilian privacy may have been under serious threat.\nOn 7 June 2013, British lawmakers concluded that BT should not have allowed Huawei access to the UK's communications network without ministerial oversight, saying they were 'deeply shocked' that BT did not inform government that they were allowing Huawei and ZTE, both with ties to the Chinese military, unfettered access to critical national systems. Furthermore, ministers discovered that the agency with the responsibility to ensure Chinese equipment and code was threat-free was entirely staffed by Huawei employees. Subsequently, parliamentarians confirmed that in case of an attack on the UK there was nothing that could be done to stop Chinese infiltration.\nBy 2016 Huawei had put measures in place to ensure the integrity of UK national security. Specifically their UK work is now overseen by a board that includes directors from GCHQ, the Cabinet Office and the Home Office.\nZTE, another Chinese company that supplies extensive network equipment and subscriber hardware used with BT 'Infinity', was also under scrutiny by parliament's intelligence and security committee after the US, Canada, Australia and the European Union declared the company a security risk.\nAlleged complicity with drone strikes in Yemen and Somalia.\nIn September 2012, BT entered into a $23\u00a0million deal with the US military to provide a key communications cable connecting RAF Croughton, a US military base on UK soil, with Camp Lemonnier, a large US base in Djibouti. Camp Lemonnier is used as a base for American drone attacks in Yemen and Somalia, and has been described by \"The Economist\" as \"the most important base for drone operations outside the war zone of Afghanistan.\"\nHuman rights groups including Reprieve and Amnesty International have criticised the use of armed drones outside declared war zones. Evidence produced by The Bureau of Investigative Journalism and Stanford University's International Human Rights &amp; Conflict Resolution Clinic suggest that drone strikes have caused substantial civilian casualties, and may be illegal under international law.\nIn 2013, BT was the subject of a complaint by Reprieve to the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills under the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, following their refusal to explain whether or not their infrastructure was used to facilitate drone strikes. The subsequent refusal of this complaint was appealed in May 2014, on the basis that the UK National Contact Point's decision did not follow the OECD Guidelines. The issue of bias was also raised, due to the appointment of Lord Ian Livingston as government minister for the department which was processing the complaint: Livingston had occupied a senior position at BT when the cable between RAF Croughton and Camp Lemonnier was originally built.\nBidding rules violation.\nIn 2020, BT has been fined \u00a36.3m by the telecoms regulator Ofcom for violating the law on a large public sector deal in Northern Ireland. Under Ofcom's regulations, the BT network shall handle all wholesale customers similarly. In its report, Ofcom found that BT's network violated the rules by failing to supply Eir with the same details on its on-demand fiber-to-the-premises offering as its own rival team."}
{"id": "4644", "revid": "33819807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4644", "title": "Balmoral Castle", "text": "Balmoral Castle () is a large estate house in Royal Deeside, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, owned by Queen Elizabeth II. It is near the village of Crathie, west of Ballater and west of Aberdeen.\nBalmoral has been one of the residences of the British royal family since 1852, when the estate and its original castle were bought from the Farquharson family by Prince Albert, the husband of Queen Victoria. \nSoon afterwards the house was found to be too small and the current Balmoral Castle was commissioned. The architect was William Smith of Aberdeen, and his designs were amended by Prince Albert. Balmoral remains private property of the Queen and is not part of the Crown Estate.\nThe castle is an example of Scottish baronial architecture, and is classified by Historic Environment Scotland as a category A listed building. The new castle was completed in 1856 and the old castle demolished shortly thereafter.\nThe Balmoral Estate has been added to by successive members of the royal family, and now covers an area of approximately . It is a working estate, including grouse moors, forestry, and farmland, as well as managed herds of deer, Highland cattle, and ponies.\nEtymology.\nRecorded first as \"Bouchmorale\" in 1451, the first element in the name \"Balmoral\" is the Gaelic \"both\" meaning \"a hut\". The second part of the name is uncertain, but may conserve a Pictish formation from \"*mor\" meaning \"large\", and \"*ial\", \"open space\" (c.f. Welsh \"mawr-ial\").\nHistory.\nKing Robert II of Scotland (1316\u20131390) had a hunting lodge in the area. Historical records also indicate that a house at Balmoral was built by Sir William Drummond in 1390. The estate was later tenanted by Alexander Gordon, second son of the 1st Earl of Huntly. A tower house was built on the estate by the Gordons.\nIn 1662, the estate passed to Charles Farquharson of Inverey, brother of John Farquharson, the \"Black Colonel\". The Farquharsons were Jacobite sympathisers, and James Farquharson of Balmoral was involved in both the 1715 and 1745 rebellions. He was wounded at the Battle of Falkirk in 1746. The Farquharson estates were forfeit, and passed to the Farquharsons of Auchendryne. In 1798, James Duff, 2nd Earl Fife, acquired Balmoral and leased the castle. Sir Robert Gordon, a younger brother of the 4th Earl of Aberdeen, acquired the lease in 1830. He made major alterations to the original castle at Balmoral, including baronial-style extensions that were designed by John Smith of Aberdeen.\nRoyal acquisition.\nQueen Victoria and Prince Albert first visited Scotland in 1842, five years after her accession to the throne and two years after their marriage. During this first visit they stayed at Edinburgh, and at Taymouth Castle in Perthshire, the home of the Marquess of Breadalbane. They returned in 1844 to stay at Blair Castle and, in 1847, when they rented Ardverikie by Loch Laggan. Frequent rain during the latter trip led Sir James Clark, the queen's doctor, to recommend Deeside instead, for its healthier climate.\nSir Robert Gordon died in 1847 and his lease on Balmoral reverted to Lord Aberdeen. In February 1848 an arrangement was made\u2014that Prince Albert would acquire the remaining part of the lease on Balmoral, together with its furniture and staff\u2014without having seen the property first.\nThe royal couple arrived for their first visit on 8 September 1848. Victoria found the house \"small but pretty\", and recorded in her diary that: \"All seemed to breathe freedom and peace, and to make one forget the world and its sad turmoils\". The surrounding hilly landscape reminded them of Thuringia, Albert's homeland in Germany.\nQuickly, the house was confirmed to be too small and, in 1848, John and William Smith were commissioned to design new offices, cottages, and other ancillary buildings. Improvements to the woodlands, gardens, and estate buildings also were being made, with the assistance of the landscape gardener, James Beattie, and possibly by the painter, James Giles.\nMajor additions to the old house were considered in 1849, but by then negotiations were under way to purchase the estate from the trustees of the deceased Earl Fife. After seeing a corrugated iron cottage at the Great Exhibition of 1851, Prince Albert ordered a pre-fabricated iron building for Balmoral from E. T. Bellhouse &amp; Co., to serve as a temporary ballroom and dining room. It was in use by 1 October 1851, and would serve as a ballroom until 1856.\nThe sale was completed in June 1852, the price being \u00a332,000, and Prince Albert formally took possession that autumn. The neighbouring estate of Birkhall was bought at the same time, and the lease on Abergeldie Castle secured as well. To mark the occasion, the \"Purchase Cairn\" was erected in the hills overlooking the castle, the first of many.\nConstruction of the new house.\nThe growing family of Victoria and Albert, the need for additional staff, and the quarters required for visiting friends and official visitors such as cabinet members, however, meant that extension of the existing structure would not be sufficient and that a larger house needed to be built. In early 1852, this was commissioned from William Smith. The son of John Smith (who designed the 1830 alterations of the original castle), William Smith was city architect of Aberdeen from 1852. On learning of the commission, William Burn sought an interview with the prince, apparently to complain that Smith previously had plagiarised his work, however, Burn was unsuccessful in depriving Smith of the appointment. William Smith's designs were amended by Prince Albert, who took a close interest in details such as turrets and windows.\nConstruction began during summer 1853, on a site some northwest of the original building that was considered to have a better vista. Another reason for consideration was, that whilst construction was ongoing, the family would still be able to use the old house. Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone on 28 September 1853, during her annual autumn visit. By the autumn of 1855, the royal apartments were ready for occupancy, although the tower was still under construction and the servants had to be lodged in the old house. By coincidence, shortly after their arrival at the estate that autumn, news circulated about the fall of Sevastopol, ending the Crimean War, resulting in wild celebrations by royalty and locals alike. While visiting the estate shortly thereafter, Prince Frederick of Prussia asked for the hand of Princess Victoria.\nThe new house was completed in 1856, and the old castle subsequently was demolished. By autumn 1857, a new bridge across the Dee, designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel linking Crathie and Balmoral was finished.\nBalmoral Castle is built from granite quarried at Invergelder on the estate. It consists of two main blocks, each arranged around a courtyard. The southwestern block contains the main rooms, while the northeastern contains the service wings. At the southeast is an clock tower topped with turrets, one of which has a balustrade similar to a feature at Castle Fraser. Being similar in style to the demolished castle of the 1830s, the architecture of the new house is considered to be somewhat dated for its time when contrasted with the richer forms of Scots baronial being developed by William Burn and others during the 1850s. As an exercise in Scots baronial, it sometimes is described as being too ordered, pedantic, and even Germanic as a consequence of Prince Albert's influence on the design.\nHowever, the purchase of a Scottish estate by Victoria and Albert and their adoption of a Scottish architectural style, was influential for the ongoing revival of Highland culture. They decorated Balmoral with tartans and attended highland games at Braemar. Queen Victoria expressed an affinity for Scotland, even professing herself to be a Jacobite. Added to the work of Sir Walter Scott, this became a major factor in promoting the adoption of Highland culture by Lowland Scots. Historian Michael Lynch comments that \"the Scottishness of Balmoral helped to give the monarchy a truly British dimension for the first time\".\nVictoria and Albert at Balmoral.\nEven before the completion of the new house, the pattern of the life of the royal couple in the Highlands was soon established. Victoria took long walks of up to four hours daily and Albert spent many days hunting deer and game. In 1849, diarist Charles Greville described their life at Balmoral as resembling that of gentry rather than royalty. Victoria began a policy of commissioning artists to record Balmoral, its surroundings, and its staff. Over the years, numerous painters were employed at Balmoral, including Edwin and Charles Landseer, Carl Haag, William Wyld, and William Henry Fisk. The royal couple took great interest in their staff. They established a lending library.\nDuring the 1850s, new plantations were established near the house and exotic conifers were planted on the grounds. Prince Albert had an active role in these improvements, overseeing the design of parterres, the diversion of the main road north of the river via a new bridge, and plans for farm buildings. These buildings included a model dairy that he developed during 1861, the year of his death. The dairy was completed by Victoria. Subsequently, she also built several monuments to her husband on the estate. These include a pyramid-shaped cairn built a year after Albert's death, on top of \"Craig Lurachain\". A large statue of Albert with a dog and a gun by William Theed, was inaugurated on 15 October 1867, the twenty-eighth anniversary of their engagement.\nFollowing Albert's death, Victoria spent increasing periods at Balmoral, staying for as long as four months a year during early summer and autumn. Few further changes were made to the grounds, with the exception of some alterations to mountain paths, the erection of various cairns and monuments, and the addition of some cottages (\"Karim Cottage\" and \"Baile na Coille\") built for senior staff. It was during this period that Victoria began to depend on her servant, John Brown. He was a local ghillie from Crathie, who became one of her closest companions during her long mourning.\nIn 1887, Balmoral Castle was the birthplace of Victoria Eugenie, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria. She was born to Princess Beatrice, the fifth daughter of Victoria and Albert. Victoria Eugenie would become the queen of Spain.\nIn September 1896, Victoria welcomed Emperor Nicholas II of Russia and Empress Alexandra, a granddaughter of Victoria, to Balmoral. Four years later Victoria made her last visit to the estate, three months before her death on 22 January 1901.\nAfter Victoria.\nAfter Victoria's death, the royal family continued to use Balmoral during annual autumn visits. George V had substantial improvements made during the 1910s and 1920s, including formal gardens to the south of the castle.\nDuring the Second World War, royal visits to Balmoral ceased. In addition, due to the enmity with Germany, \"Danzig Shiel\", a lodge built by Victoria in Ballochbuie was renamed \"Garbh Allt Shiel\" and the \"King of Prussia's Fountain\" was removed from the grounds.\nSince the 1950s, Prince Philip has added herbaceous borders and a water garden. During the 1980s, new staff buildings were built close to the castle.\nArchitecture.\nThough called a castle, Balmoral's primary function is that of a country house. It is a \"typical and rather ordinary\" country house from the Victorian period. The tower and \"pepper pot turrets\" are characteristic features of the residence's Scottish baronial style. The seven-storey tower is an architectural feature borrowed from medieval defensive tower houses. The \"pepper pot\" turrets were influenced by the style of 16th-century French ch\u00e2teaux. Other features of the Scottish baronial style are the crow-stepped gables, dormer windows, and battlemented porte-coch\u00e8re.\nOwnership.\nBalmoral is a private property and, unlike the monarch's official residences, is not the property of the Crown. It originally was purchased personally by Prince Albert, rather than the queen, meaning that no revenues from the estate go to Parliament or to the public purse, as would otherwise be the case for property owned outright by the monarch in accord with the Civil List Act 1760. Along with Sandringham House in Norfolk, ownership of Balmoral was inherited by Edward VIII on his accession in 1936. When he abdicated later the same year, however, he retained ownership of them. A financial settlement was devised, under which Balmoral and Sandringham were purchased by Edward's brother and successor to the Crown, George VI.\nCurrently, the estate is still owned outright by the monarch, but is managed by Trustees under Deeds of Nomination and Appointment.\nThe estate.\nCurrent extent and operation.\nBalmoral Estate is within the Cairngorms National Park and is partly within the Deeside and Lochnagar National Scenic Area. The estate contains a wide variety of landscapes, from the Dee river valley to open mountains. There are seven Munros (hills in Scotland over ) within the estate, the highest being Lochnagar at . This mountain was the setting for a children's story, \"The Old Man of Lochnagar\", told originally by Prince Charles to his younger brothers, Andrew and Edward. The story was published in 1980, with royalties accruing to The Prince's Trust. The estate also incorporates the Delnadamph Lodge estate, bought by Elizabeth II in 1978. \nThe estate extends to Loch Muick in the southeast where an old boat house and the Royal Bothy (hunting lodge) now named \"Glas-allt-Shiel\", built by Victoria, are located.\nThe working estate includes grouse moors, forestry, and farmland, as well as managed herds of deer, Highland cattle, and ponies. It also offers access to the public for fishing (paid) and hiking during certain seasons.\nApproximately of the estate are covered by trees, with almost used for forestry that yields nearly 10,000 tonnes of wood per year. \"Ballochbuie Forest\", one of the largest remaining areas of old Caledonian pine growth in Scotland, consists of approximately . It is managed with only minimal or no intervention. The principal mammal on the estate is the red deer with a population of 2,000 to 2,500 head.\nThe areas of Lochnagar and Ballochbuie were designated in 1998 by the Secretary of State for Scotland as Special Protection Areas (SPA) under the European Union (EU) Birds Directive.\nBird species inhabiting the moorlands include red grouse, black grouse, ptarmigan, and the capercaillie. Ballochbuie also is protected as a Special Area of Conservation by the EU Habitats Directive, as \"one of the largest remaining continuous areas of native Caledonian Forest\". In addition, there are four sites of special scientific interest on the estate.\nThe royal family employs approximately 50 full-time and 50\u2013100 part-time staff to maintain the working estate.\nThere are approximately 150 buildings on the estate, including Birkhall, formerly home to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, and used now by Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall for their summer holidays. Craigowan Lodge is used regularly by the family and friends of the royal family and also has been used while Balmoral Castle was being prepared for a royal visit. Six smaller buildings on the estate are let as holiday cottages.\nPublic access to gardens and castle grounds.\nIn 1931, the castle gardens were opened to the public for the first time and they now are open daily between April and the end of July, after which Queen Elizabeth II arrives for her annual stay. The ballroom is the only room in the castle that may be viewed by the public.\nCraigowan Lodge.\nCraigowan Lodge is a seven-bedroom stone house approximately from the main castle in Balmoral. More rustic than the castle, the lodge was often the home of Charles and Diana when they visited. Currently, it is used as quarters for important guests.\nIn the obituary of Michael Andreevich Romanoff, the highest-ranking member of the Russian imperial family at the time of his death in 2008, it was noted that his family spent most of World War II at Craigowan Lodge.\nThe lodge has been in the news periodically since 2005, because Elizabeth II and Prince Philip often spend the first few days of their summer holiday there. During each weekend of the summer, the castle is a lucrative source of income from visiting tourists. Sometimes, the Queen arrives at Balmoral before the tourist visiting season is over.\nIn popular culture.\nQueen Elizabeth II was in residence at Balmoral at the time of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. Her private discussions with then Prime Minister Tony Blair were dramatised in the Stephen Frears film \"The Queen\" (2006). The film \"Mrs Brown\" (1997) was also was based on events at Balmoral, this time in the reign of Queen Victoria. In both films, however, substitute locations were used: Blairquhan Castle in \"The Queen\"; and Duns Castle in \"Mrs Brown\".\nQueen Elizabeth II's visits to Balmoral Castle were also featured in several episodes of the Netflix series \"The Crown\". Ardverikie House was used as a stand-in for the royal estate for filming purposes.\nBanknote illustration.\nSince 1987 an illustration of the castle has been featured on the reverse of \u00a3100 notes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland."}
{"id": "4647", "revid": "38945760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4647", "title": "Breton language", "text": "Breton (; ; ) is a Southwestern Brittonic language of the Celtic language family spoken in Brittany, modern-day France.\nBreton was brought from Great Britain to Armorica (the ancient name for the coastal region that includes the Brittany peninsula) by migrating Britons during the Early Middle Ages, making it an Insular Celtic language. Breton is most closely related to Cornish, another Southwestern Brittonic language. Welsh and the extinct Cumbric, both Western Brittonic languages, are more distantly related.\nHaving declined from more than 1 million speakers around 1950 to about 200,000 in the first decade of the 21st century, Breton is classified as \"severely endangered\" by the UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger. However, the number of children attending bilingual classes has risen 33% between 2006 and 2012 to 14,709.\nHistory and status.\nBreton is spoken in Lower Brittany (), roughly to the west of a line linking Plouha (west of Saint-Brieuc) and La Roche-Bernard (east of Vannes). It comes from a Brittonic language community that once extended from Great Britain to Armorica (present-day Brittany) and had even established a toehold in Galicia (in present-day Spain). Old Breton is attested from the 9th century. It was the language of the upper classes until the 12th century, after which it became the language of commoners in Lower Brittany. The nobility, followed by the bourgeoisie, adopted French. The written language of the Duchy of Brittany was Latin, switching to French in the 15th century. There exists a limited tradition of Breton literature. Some philosophical and scientific terms in Modern Breton come from Old Breton. The recognized stages of the Breton language are: Old Breton - c.800 to c.1100, Middle Breton - c.1100 to c.1650, Modern Breton - c.1650 to present.\nThe French monarchy was not concerned with the minority languages of France, spoken by the lower classes, and required the use of French for government business as part of its policy of national unity. During the French Revolution, the government introduced policies favouring French over the regional languages, which it pejoratively referred to as . The revolutionaries assumed that reactionary and monarchist forces preferred regional languages to try to keep the peasant masses underinformed. In 1794, Bertrand Bar\u00e8re submitted his \"report on the \" to the Committee of Public Safety in which he said that \"federalism and superstition speak Breton\".\nSince the 19th century, under the Third, Fourth and now Fifth Republics, the French government has attempted to stamp out minority languages\u2014including Breton\u2014in state schools, in an effort to build a national culture. Teachers humiliated students for using their regional languages, and such practices prevailed until the late 1960s.\nIn the early 21st century, due to the political centralization of France, the influence of the media, and the increasing mobility of people, only about 200,000 people are active speakers of Breton, a dramatic decline from more than 1 million in 1950. The majority of today's speakers are more than 60 years old, and Breton is now classified as an endangered language.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, half of the population of Lower Brittany knew only Breton; the other half were bilingual. By 1950, there were only 100,000 monolingual Bretons, and this rapid decline has continued, with likely no monolingual speakers left today. A statistical survey in 1997 found around 300,000 speakers in Lower Brittany, of whom about 190,000 were aged 60 or older. Few 15- to 19-year-olds spoke Breton. In 1993, parents were finally legally allowed to give their children Breton names.\nRevival efforts.\nIn 1925, Professor Roparz Hemon founded the Breton-language review . During its 19-year run, tried to raise the language to the level of a great international language. Its publication encouraged the creation of original literature in all genres, and proposed Breton translations of internationally recognized foreign works. In 1946, replaced . Other Breton-language periodicals have been published, which established a fairly large body of literature for a minority language.\nIn 1977, Diwan schools were founded to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully immersive primary school and partially immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton.\nThe \"Asterix\" comic series has been translated into Breton. According to the comic, the Gaulish village where Asterix lives is in the Armorica peninsula, which is now Brittany. Some other popular comics have also been translated into Breton, including \"The Adventures of Tintin\", , \"Titeuf\", \"H\u00e4gar the Horrible\", \"Peanuts\" and \"Yakari\".\nSome original media are created in Breton. The sitcom, , is in Breton. Radio Kerne, broadcasting from Finist\u00e8re, has exclusively Breton programming. Some movies (\"Lancelot du Lac\", \"Shakespeare in Love\", \"Marion du Faouet\", \"Sezneg\") and TV series (\"Columbo\", \"Perry Mason\") have also been translated and broadcast in Breton. Poets, singers, linguists, and writers who have written in Breton, including Yann-Ber Kalloc'h, Roparz Hemon, Anjela Duval, Xavier de Langlais, P\u00ear-Jakez Helias, Youenn Gwernig, Glenmor, Vefa de Saint-Pierre and Alan Stivell are now known internationally.\nToday, Breton is the only living Celtic language that is not recognized by a national government as an official or regional language.\nThe first Breton dictionary, the \"Catholicon\", was also the first French dictionary. Edited by Jehan Lagadec in 1464, it was a trilingual work containing Breton, French and Latin. Today bilingual dictionaries have been published for Breton and languages including English, Dutch, German, Spanish and Welsh. A new generation is determined to gain international recognition for Breton. The monolingual dictionary, (1995), defines Breton words in Breton. The first edition contained about 10,000 words, and the second edition of 2001 contains 20,000 words.\nIn the early 21st century, the (\"Office of the Breton language\") began a campaign to encourage daily use of Breton in the region by both businesses and local communes. Efforts include installing bilingual signs and posters for regional events, as well as encouraging the use of the Spilhennig to let speakers identify each other. The office also started an Internationalization and localization policy asking Google, Firefox and SPIP to develop their interfaces in Breton. In 2004, the Breton Wikipedia started, which now counts more than 65,000 articles. In March 2007, the signed a tripartite agreement with Regional Council of Brittany and Microsoft for the consideration of the Breton language in Microsoft products. In October 2014, Facebook added Breton as one of its 121 languages after three years of talks between the and Facebook.\nGeographic distribution and dialects.\nBreton is spoken mainly in Lower Brittany, but also in a more dispersed way in Upper Brittany (where it is spoken alongside Gallo and French), and in areas around the world that have Breton emigrants.\nThe four traditional dialects of Breton correspond to medieval bishoprics rather than to linguistic divisions. They are (, of the county of L\u00e9on), (, of Tr\u00e9gor), (, of ), and (, of Vannes). was spoken up to the beginning of the 20th century in the region of Gu\u00e9rande and Batz-sur-Mer. There are no clear boundaries between the dialects because they form a dialect continuum, varying only slightly from one village to the next. , however, requires a little study to be intelligible with most of the other dialects.\nOfficial status.\nNation.\nAs noted, only French is an official language of France. Supporters of Breton and other minority languages continue to argue for their recognition, and for their place in education, public schools, and public life.\nConstitution.\nIn July 2008, the legislature amended the French Constitution, adding article 75-1: (the regional languages belong to the heritage of France).\nThe European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which obliges signatory states to recognize minority and regional languages, was signed by France in 1999 but has not been ratified. On 27 October 2015, the Senate rejected a draft constitutional law ratifying the charter.\nRegion.\nRegional and departmental authorities use Breton to a very limited extent. Some bilingual signage has also been installed, such as street name signs in Breton towns. One station of the Rennes metro system has signs in both French and Breton.\nUnder the French law known as Toubon, it is illegal for commercial signage to be in Breton alone. Signs must be bilingual or French only. Since commercial signage usually has limited physical space, most businesses have signs only in French.\n, the Breton language agency, was set up in 1999 by the Brittany region to promote and develop the daily use of Breton. It created the campaign, to encourage enterprises, organisations and communes to promote the use of Breton, for example by installing bilingual signage or translating their websites into Breton.\nEducation.\nIn the late 20th century, the French government considered incorporating the independent Breton-language immersion schools (called ) into the state education system. This action was blocked by the French Constitutional Council based on the 1994 amendment to the Constitution that establishes French as the language of the republic. Therefore, no other language may be used as a language of instruction in state schools. The Toubon Law implemented the amendment, asserting that French is the language of public education.\nThe Diwan schools were founded in Brittany in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully immersive primary school and partially immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton. The schools have also gained fame from to their high level of results in school exams, including those on French language and literature. Breton-language schools do not receive funding from the national government, though the Brittany Region may fund them.\nAnother teaching method is a bilingual approach by (\"Two Languages\") in the State schools, created in 1979. (\"Awakening\") was created in 1990 for bilingual education in the Catholic schools.\nStatistics.\nIn 2018, 18,337 pupils (about 2.00% of all pupils in Brittany) attended , and schools, and their number has increased yearly. The goal of Jean-Yves Le Drian (president of the Regional Council) of 20,000, and of \u201ctheir recognition\u201d for \u201ctheir place in education, public schools, and public life\u201d, by 2010, was not achieved, but he describes being encouraged by their progress.\nIn 2007, some 4,500 to 5,000 adults followed such a Breton language course as an evening or correspondence one. The transmission of Breton in 1999 is estimated to be 3 percent.\nGrowth of the percentage of pupils in bilingual education.\nPercentage of pupils in bilingual education per department.\nMunicipalities.\nThe 10 communes with the highest percentage of pupils in bilingual primary education, listed with their total population.\nThe 10 communes of historic Brittany with the highest total population, listed with their percentages of pupils in bilingual primary education.\nOther forms of education.\nIn addition to bilingual education (including Breton-medium education) the region has introduced the Breton language in primary education, mainly in the department of Finist\u00e8re. These \"initiation\" sessions are generally one to three hours per week, and consist of songs and games.\nSchools in secondary education ( and ) offer some courses in Breton. In 2010, nearly 5,000 students in Brittany were reported to be taking this option. Additionally, the University of Rennes 2 has a Breton language department offering courses in the language along with a master's degree in Breton and Celtic Studies.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nVowels in Breton may be short or long. All unstressed vowels are short; stressed vowels can be short or long (vowel lengths are not noted in usual orthographies as they are implicit in the phonology of particular dialects, and not all dialects pronounce stressed vowels as long). An emergence of a schwa sound occurs as a result of vowel neutralization in post-tonic position, among different dialects.\nAll vowels can also be nasalized, which is noted by appending an 'n' letter after the base vowel, or by adding a combining tilde above the vowel (most commonly and easily done for \"a\" and \"o\" due to the Portuguese letters), or more commonly by non-ambiguously appending an letter after the base vowel (this depends on the orthographic variant).\nDiphthongs are .\nGrammar.\nNouns.\nBreton languages are marked for gender and number. While Breton gender is fairly typical of gender systems across west Europe (with the exception of Basque, and modern English), Breton number markers demonstrate rarer behaviors. \nGender.\nBreton has two genders: masculine () and feminine (), having largely lost its historic neuter () as has also occurred in the other Celtic languages as well as across the Romance languages. Certain suffixes (\"-ach/-aj, -(a)dur, -er, -lec'h, -our, -ti, -va\") are masculine, while others (\"-enti, -er, -ez, -ezh, -ezon, -i\", \"-eg\", \"-ell\", and the singulative \"-enn\") are feminine. The suffix \"-eg\" can be masculine or feminine.\nThere are certain non-determinant factors that influence gender assignment. Biological sex is applied for animate referents. Metals, time divisions (except for \"hour\", \"night\" and \"week\") and mountains tend to be masculine, while rivers, cities and countries tend to be feminine.\nHowever, gender assignment to certain words often varies between dialects.\nNumber.\nNumber in Breton is primarily based on an opposition between singular and plural. However, the system is noted as full of complexities in how this distinction is realized.\nAlthough modern Breton has lost its ancestral dual number marker, relics of its use are preserved in various nouns pertaining to body parts, including the words for eyes, ears, cheeks, legs, armpits, arms, hands, knees, thighs, and wings. This is seen in a prefix (formed in , or ) that is etymologically derived from the prefixation of the number two. The dual is no longer productive, and has merely been lexicalized in these cases rather than remaining a part of Breton grammar. The (etymologically) already dual words for eyes () and ears () can be pluralized \"again\" to form and .\nLike other Brythonic languages, Breton has a singulative suffix that is used to form singulars out of collective nouns, for which the morphologically less complex form is the plural. Thus, the singulative of the collective \"mice\" is \"mouse\". However, Breton goes beyond Welsh in the complications of this system. Collectives can be pluralized to make forms which are different in meaning from the normal collective-- \"fish\" (singular) is pluralized to , singulativized to , referring to a single fish out of a certain group of fish\", and this singulative of the plural can then be pluralized again to make , referring to single individual fish out of a school of fish.\nOn top of this, the formation of plurals is complicated by two different pluralizing functions. The \"default\" plural formation is contrasted with another formation which is said to \"emphasize variety or diversity\" -- thus two semantically different plurals can be formed out of : \"parks\" and \"various different parks\". Ball reports that the latter pluralizer is used only for inanimate nouns. Certain formations have been lexicalized to have meanings other than that which might be predicted solely from the morphology: \"water\" pluralized forms which means not \"waters\" but instead \"rivers\", while now has come to mean \"running waters after a storm\". Certain forms have lost the singular from their paradigm: means \"news\" and is not used, while has become the regular plural, \"newses\" (different news items).\nMeanwhile, certain nouns can form doubly marked plurals with lexicalized meanings -- \"child\" is pluralized one time into \"children\" and then pluralized the second time to make \"groups of children\".\nThe diminutive suffix also has the somewhat unusual property of triggering double marking of the plural: means \"little child\", but the doubly pluralized means \"little children\"; boat has a singular diminutive and a simple plural , thus its diminutive plural is the doubly pluralized .\nAs seen elsewhere in many Celtic languages, the formation of the plural can be hard to predict, being determined by a mix of semantic, morphological and lexical factors.\nThe most common plural marker is , with its variant ; most nouns which use this noun are inanimates, however collectives of both inanimate and animate nouns always use it as well.\nMost animate nouns, including trees, take a plural in . However, in some dialects, the use of this affix has become rare. Various masculine nouns including occupations as well as the word (\"Englishman\", plural ) take the suffix , with a range of variants including , , , and . \nThe rare pluralizing suffixes / and are used for a few nouns. When they are appended, they also trigger a change in the vowel of the root: triggers a vowel harmony effect whereby some or all preceding vowels are changed to ( \"cousin\" \u2192 \"cousins\"; \"crow\" \u2192 \"crows\"; \"'partridge\" \u2192 \"partridges); the changes associated with / are less predictable.\nVarious nouns instead form their plural merely with ablaut: or in the stem being changed to : \"wing\" \u2192 \"wings\"; \"tooth\" \u2192 \"teeth\"; \"rope\" \u2192 \"ropes\". \nAnother set of nouns have lexicalized plurals that bear little if any resemblance to their singulars. These include \"girl\" \u2192 , \"pig\" \u2192 , \"cow\" \u2192 , and \"dog\" \u2192 .\nIn compound nouns, the head noun, which usually comes first, is pluralized.\nVerbal aspect.\nLike in other Celtic languages as well as English, a variety of verbal constructions are available to express grammatical aspect, for example: showing a distinction between progressive and habitual actions:\nInflected prepositions.\nAs in other modern Celtic languages, Breton pronouns are fused into preceding prepositions to produce a sort of inflected preposition. Below are some examples in Breton, Cornish, Welsh, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx, along with English translations.\nNote that in the examples above the Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx) use the preposition meaning \"at\" to show possession, whereas the Brittonic languages use \"with\". The Goidelic languages, however, do use the preposition \"with\" to express \"belong to\" (Irish , Scottish , Manx , The book belongs to me).\nThe Welsh examples are in literary Welsh. The order and preposition may differ slightly in colloquial Welsh (Formal , North Wales , South Wales ).\nInitial consonant mutations.\nBreton has four initial consonant mutations: though modern Breton lost the nasal mutation of Welsh, it also has a \"hard\" mutation, in which voiced stops become voiceless, and a \"mixed\" mutation, which is a mixture of hard and soft mutations.\nWord order.\nNormal word order, like the other Insular Celtic languages, is VSO (Verb Subject Object). It is however perfectly possible to put the Subject or the Object at the beginning of the sentence. This largely depends on the focus of the speaker. The following options are possible (all with a little difference in meaning):\nVocabulary.\nBreton is notable as being far more prone to loaning vocabulary than its relatives further north; by a some estimates, a full 40% of its core vocabulary consists of loans from French.\nWords that passed into French and into English.\nThe English words and have been borrowed from French, which took them from Breton. However, this is uncertain: for instance, is or (\"long stone\"), (\"straight stone\") (two words: noun + adjective) in Breton. \"Dolmen\" is a misconstructed word (it should be ). Some studies state that these words were borrowed from Cornish. can be directly translated from Welsh as \"long stone\" (which is exactly what a or is). The Cornish surnames Mennear, Minear and Manhire all derive from the Cornish (\"long stone\"), as does \"settlement by the long stone\".\nThe French word (\"to jabber in a foreign language\") is derived from Breton (\"bread\") and (\"wine\"). The French word (\"large seagull\") is derived from Breton , which shares the same root as English \"gull\" (Welsh , Cornish ).\nOrthography.\nThe first extant Breton texts, contained in the Leyde manuscript, were written at the end of the 8th century: 50 years prior to the Strasbourg Oaths, considered to be the earliest example of French. Like many medieval orthographies, Old- and Middle Breton orthography was at first not standardised, and the spelling of a particular word varied at authors' discretion. In 1499, however, the \"Catholicon\", was published; as the first dictionary written for both French and Breton, it became a point of reference on how to transcribe the language. The orthography presented in the \"Catholicon\" was largely similar to that of French, in particular with respect to the representation of vowels, as well as the use of both the Latinate digraph \u2014a remnant of the sound change /k\u02b7/ &gt; /k/ in Latin\u2014and Brittonic or to represent /k/ before front vowels.\nAs phonetic and phonological differences between the dialects began to magnify, many regions, particularly the Vannes country, began to devise their own orthographies. Many of these orthographies were more closely related to the French model, albeit with some modifications. Examples of these modifications include the replacement of Old Breton with to denote word-final /x~h/ (an evolution of Old Breton /\u03b8/ in the Vannes dialect) and use of to denote the initial mutation of /k/ (today this mutation is written ). and thus needed another transcription.\nIn the 1830s Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Le Gonidec created a modern phonetic system for the language.\nDuring the early years of the 20th century, a group of writers known as elaborated and reformed Le Gonidec's system. They made it more suitable as a super-dialectal representation of the dialects of Cornouaille, Leon and Tr\u00e9gor (known as from , and in Breton). This KLT orthography was established in 1911. At the same time writers of the more divergent Vannetais dialect developed a phonetic system also based on that of Le Gonidec.\nFollowing proposals made during the 1920s, the KLT and Vannetais orthographies were merged in 1941 to create an orthographic system to represent all four dialects. This (\"wholly unified\") orthography was significant for the inclusion of the \"zh\" digraph, which represents a in Vannetais and corresponds to a in the KLT dialects.\nIn 1955 Fran\u00e7ois Falc'hun and the group Emgleo Breiz proposed a new orthography. It was designed to use a set of graphemes closer to the conventions of French. This (\"University Orthography\", known in Breton as ) was given official recognition by the French authorities as the \"official orthography of Breton in French education.\" It was opposed in the region and today is used only by the magazine and the publishing house Emgl\u00e9o Breiz.\nIn the 1970s, a new standard orthography was devised \u2014 the or . This system is based on the derivation of the words.\nToday the majority of writers continue to use the \"Peurunvan orthography\", and it is the version taught in most Breton-language schools.\nAlphabet.\nBreton is written in the Latin script. \"Peurunvan\", the most commonly used orthography, consists of the following letters:\nThe circumflex, grave accent, trema and tilde appear on some letters. These diacritics are used in the following way:\nDifferences between and.\nBoth orthographies use the above alphabet, although \"\u00e9\" is used only in .\nDifferences between the two systems are particularly noticeable in word endings. In Peurunvan, final obstruents, which are devoiced in absolute final position and voiced in sandhi before voiced sounds, are represented by a grapheme that indicates a voiceless sound. In OU they are written as voiced but represented as voiceless before suffixes: (big), (bigger).\nIn addition, Peurunvan maintains the KLT convention, which distinguishes noun/adjective pairs by nouns written with a final voiced consonant and adjectives with a voiceless one. No distinction is made in pronunciation, e.g. ' \"Breton language\" vs. ' \"Breton (adj)\".\nSome examples of words in the different orthographies:\nPronunciation of the Breton alphabet.\nNotes:\nExamples.\nWords and phrases in Breton.\nVisitors to Brittany may encounter words and phrases (especially on signs and posters) such as the following:\nLanguage comparison.\n! English !! French !! Breton !! Cornish !! Welsh !! Scottish Gaelic !! Irish "}
{"id": "4648", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4648", "title": "Broch", "text": "A broch () is an Iron Age drystone hollow-walled structure found in Scotland. Brochs belong to the classification \"complex Atlantic roundhouse\" devised by Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s. Their origin is a matter of some controversy.\nOrigin and definition.\nThe word \"broch\" is derived from Lowland Scots 'brough', meaning (among other things) fort. In the mid-19th century Scottish antiquaries called brochs 'burgs', after Old Norse ', with the same meaning. Place names in Scandinavian Scotland such as Burgawater and Burgan show that Old Norse ' is the older word used for these structures in the north. Brochs are often referred to as \"duns\" in the west. Antiquarians began to use the spelling \"broch\" in the 1870s.\nA precise definition for the word has proved elusive. Brochs are the most spectacular of a complex class of roundhouse buildings found throughout Atlantic Scotland. The Shetland Amenity Trust lists about 120 sites in Shetland as candidate brochs, while the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland (RCAHMS) identifies a total of 571 candidate broch sites throughout the country. Researcher Euan MacKie has proposed a much smaller total for Scotland of 104.\nThe origin of brochs is a subject of continuing research. Sixty years ago most archaeologists believed that brochs, usually regarded as the 'castles' of Iron Age chieftains, were built by immigrants who had been pushed northward after being displaced first by the intrusions of Belgic tribes into what is now southeast England at the end of the second century BC and later by the Roman invasion of southern Britain beginning in AD 43. Yet there is now little doubt that the hollow-walled broch tower was purely an invention in what is now Scotland; even the kinds of pottery found inside them that most resembled south British styles were local hybrid forms. The first of the modern review articles on the subject (MacKie 1965) did not, as is commonly believed, propose that brochs were built by immigrants, but rather that a hybrid culture formed from the blending of a small number of immigrants with the native population of the Hebrides produced them in the first century BC, basing them on earlier, simpler, promontory forts. This view contrasted, for example, with that of Sir W. Lindsay Scott, who argued, following V. Gordon Childe (1935), for a wholesale migration into Atlantic Scotland of people from southwest England.\nMacKie's theory has fallen from favour too, mainly because starting in the 1970s there was a general move in archaeology away from 'diffusionist' explanations towards those pointing to exclusively indigenous development. Meanwhile, the increasing number \u2013 albeit still pitifully few \u2013 of radiocarbon dates for the primary use of brochs (as opposed to their later, secondary use) still suggests that most of the towers were built in the 1st centuries BC and AD. A few may be earlier, notably the one proposed for Old Scatness Broch in Shetland, where a sheep bone dating to 390\u2013200 BC has been reported.\nThe other broch claimed to be substantially older than the 1st century BC is Crosskirk in Caithness, but a recent review of the evidence suggests that it cannot plausibly be assigned a date earlier than the 1st centuries BC/AD.\nDistribution.\nThe distribution of brochs is centred on northern Scotland. Caithness, Sutherland and the Northern Isles have the densest concentrations, but there are a great many examples in the west of Scotland and the Hebrides. Although mainly concentrated in the northern Highlands and the Islands, a few examples occur in the Borders (for example Edin's Hall Broch and Bow Castle Broch), on the west coast of Dumfries and Galloway, and near Stirling. In a c.1560 sketch there appears to be a broch by the river next to Annan Castle in Dumfries and Galloway. This small group of southern brochs has never been satisfactorily explained.\nPurposes.\nThe original interpretation of brochs, favoured by nineteenth century antiquarians, was that they were defensive structures, places of refuge for the community and their livestock. They were sometimes regarded as the work of Danes or Picts. From the 1930s to the 1960s, archaeologists such as V. Gordon Childe and later John Hamilton regarded them as castles where local landowners held sway over a subject population.\nThe castle theory fell from favour among Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s, due to a lack of supporting archaeological evidence. These archaeologists suggested defensibility was never a major concern in the siting of a broch, and argued that they may have been the \"stately homes\" of their time, objects of prestige and very visible demonstrations of superiority for important families (Armit 2003). Once again, however, there is a lack of archaeological proof for this reconstruction, and the sheer number of brochs, sometimes in places with a lack of good land, makes it problematic.\nBrochs' close groupings and profusion in many areas may indeed suggest that they had a primarily defensive or even offensive function. Some of them were sited beside precipitous cliffs and were protected by large ramparts, artificial or natural: a good example is at Burland near Gulberwick in Shetland, on a clifftop and cut off from the mainland by huge ditches. Often they are at key strategic points. In Shetland they sometimes cluster on each side of narrow stretches of water: the Broch of Mousa, for instance, is directly opposite another at Burraland in Sandwick. In Orkney there are more than a dozen on the facing shores of Eynhallow Sound, and many at the exits and entrances of the great harbour of Scapa Flow. In Sutherland quite a few are placed along the sides and at the mouths of deep valleys. Writing in 1956 John Stewart suggested that brochs were forts put up by a military society to scan and protect the countryside and seas.\nFinally, some archaeologists consider broch sites individually, doubting that there ever was a single common purpose for which every broch was constructed. There are differences in position, dimensions and likely status between the various areas in which brochs are found. For example, the broch \"villages\" which occur at a few places in Orkney have no parallel in the Western Isles.\nStructures.\nGenerally, brochs have a single entrance with bar-holes, door-checks and lintels. There are mural cells and there is a scarcement (ledge), perhaps for timber-framed lean-to dwellings lining the inner face of the wall. Also there is a spiral staircase winding upwards between the inner and outer wall and connecting the galleries. Brochs vary from 5 to 15\u00a0metres (16\u201350\u00a0ft) in internal diameter, with 3\u00a0metre (10\u00a0ft) thick walls. On average, the walls only survive to a few metres in height. There are five extant examples of towers with significantly higher walls: Dun Carloway on Lewis, Dun Telve and Dun Troddan in Glenelg, Mousa in Shetland and Dun Dornaigil in Sutherland, all of whose walls exceed 6.5\u00a0m (21\u00a0ft) in height.\nMousa's walls are the best preserved and are still 13\u00a0m tall; it is not clear how many brochs originally stood this high. A frequent characteristic is that the walls are galleried: with an open space between, the outer and inner wall skins are separate but tied together with linking stone slabs; these linking slabs may in some cases have served as steps to higher floors. It is normal for there to be a cell breaking off from the passage beside the door; this is known as the guard cell. It has been found in some Shetland brochs that guard cells in entrance passageways are close to large door-check stones. Although there was much argument in the past, it is now generally accepted among archaeologists that brochs were roofed, perhaps with a conical timber framed roof covered with a locally sourced thatch. The evidence for this assertion is still fairly scanty, although excavations at Dun Bharabhat, Lewis, may support it. The main difficulty with this interpretation continues to be identifying potential sources of structural timber, though bog and driftwood may have been plentiful sources.\nVery few of the brochs on the islands of Orkney and Shetland have cells on the ground floor. Most brochs have scarcements (ledges) which may have allowed the construction of a very sturdy wooden first floor (first spotted by the antiquary George Low in Shetland in 1774), and excavations at Loch na Berie on the Isle of Lewis show signs of a further, second floor (e.g. stairs on the first floor, which head upwards). Some brochs such as Dun Dornaigil and Culswick in Shetland have unusual triangular lintels above the entrance door.\nAs in the case of Old Scatness in Shetland (near Jarlshof and Burroughston on Shapinsay), brochs were sometimes located close to arable land and a source of water (some have wells or natural springs rising within their central space). Sometimes, on the other hand, they were sited in wilderness areas (e.g. Levenwick and Culswick in Shetland, Castle Cole in Sutherland). Brochs are often built beside the sea (Carn Liath, Sutherland); sometimes they are on islands in lochs (e.g. Clickimin in Shetland).\nAbout 20 Orcadian broch sites include small settlements of stone buildings surrounding the main tower. Examples include Howe, near Stromness, Gurness Broch in the north west of Mainland, Orkney, Midhowe on Rousay and Lingro near Kirkwall (destroyed in the 1980s). There are \"broch village\" sites in Caithness, but elsewhere they are unknown.\nMost brochs are unexcavated. The end of the broch building period seems to have come around AD 100\u2013200. Those that have been properly examined show that they continued to be in use for many centuries, with the interiors often modified and changed, and that they underwent many phases of habitation and abandonment.\nHeritage status.\nThe Crucible of Iron Age Shetland's Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof sites are on the United Kingdom \"Tentative List\" of possible nominations for the UNESCO World Heritage Programme list of sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of humankind. This list, published in July 2010, includes sites that may be nominated for inscription over the next 5\u201310 years."}
{"id": "4649", "revid": "1011985111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4649", "title": "Billy Crystal", "text": "William Edward Crystal (born March 14, 1948) is an American actor, comedian, singer, writer, producer, director, and television host. He gained prominence in the 1970s and 1980s for television roles as Jodie Dallas on the ABC sitcom \"Soap\" and as a cast member and frequent host of \"Saturday Night Live\". He then became a Hollywood film star during the late 1980s and 1990s, appearing in the critical and box office successes \"Rabbit Test\" (1978), \"The Princess Bride\" (1987), \"Throw Momma from the Train\" (1987), \"Memories of Me\" (1988), \"When Harry Met Sally...\" (1989), \"City Slickers\" (1991), \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992), \"Analyze This\" (1999), and \"Parental Guidance\" (2012). He provided the voice of Mike Wazowski in the \"Monsters, Inc.\" films, starting in 2001. He will reprise his role in the upcoming Disney+ series \"Monsters at Work\" (2021).\nFor his work, he received numerous accolades, including six Primetime Emmy Awards (out of twenty-one nominations), a Tony Award, a Mark Twain Prize and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1991. He has hosted the Academy Awards nine times, beginning in 1990 and most recently in 2012.\nEarly life.\nCrystal was born at Doctors Hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and initially raised in The Bronx. As a toddler, he moved with his family to 549 East Park Avenue in Long Beach, New York, on Long Island. He and his older brothers Joel, who later became an art teacher, and Richard, nicknamed Rip, were the sons of Helen (n\u00e9e Gabler), a housewife, and Jack Crystal, who owned and operated the Commodore Music Store, founded by Helen's father, Julius Gabler. Jack was also a jazz promoter, a producer, and an executive for an affiliated jazz record label, Commodore Records, founded by Helen's brother, musician and songwriter Milt Gabler. Crystal is Jewish (his family emigrated from Austria, Russia, and Lithuania), and he grew up attending Temple Emanu-El (Long Beach, New York) where he was \"Bar Mitzvahed\". The three young brothers would entertain by reprising comedy routines from the likes of Bob Newhart, Rich Little and Sid Caesar records their father would bring home. Jazz artists such as Arvell Shaw, Pee Wee Russell, Eddie Condon, and Billie Holiday were often guests in the home. With the decline of Dixieland jazz and the rise of discount record stores, in 1963, Crystal's father lost his business and died later that year at the age of 54 after suffering a heart attack while bowling. His mother, Helen Crystal, died in 2001.\nAfter graduating from Long Beach High School in 1965, Crystal attended Marshall University in Huntington, West Virginia, on a baseball scholarship, having learned the game from his father, who pitched for St. John's University. Crystal never played baseball at Marshall because the program was suspended during his first year. He did not return to Marshall as a sophomore, instead deciding to stay in New York to be close to his future wife. He studied acting at HB Studio. He attended Nassau Community College with Janice and later transferred to New York University, where he was a film and television directing major. He graduated from NYU in 1970 with a BFA from its School of Fine Arts, not yet named for the Tisch family. One of his instructors was Martin Scorsese, while Oliver Stone and Christopher Guest were among his classmates.\nCareer.\nTelevision.\nCrystal returned to New York City. For four years, he was part of a comedy trio with two friends. They played colleges and coffee houses and Crystal worked as a substitute teacher on Long Island. He later became a solo act and performed regularly at \"The Improv\" and \"Catch a Rising Star\". In 1976, Crystal appeared on an episode of \"All in the Family\". He was on the dais for The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast of Muhammad Ali on February 19, 1976, where he did impressions of both Ali and sportscaster Howard Cosell. He was scheduled to appear on the first episode of \"NBC Saturday Night\" on October 11, 1975 (The show was later renamed \"Saturday Night Live\" on March 26, 1977), but his sketch was cut. He did perform on episode 17 of that first season, doing a monologue of an old jazz man capped by the line \"Can you dig it? I knew that you could.\" Host Ron Nessen introduced him as \"Bill Crystal\". Crystal was a guest on the first and the last episode of \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,\" which concluded February 6, 2014, after 22 seasons on the air. Crystal also made game show appearances such as \"The Hollywood Squares,\" \"All Star Secrets\" and \"The $20,000 Pyramid.\" To this day, he holds the Pyramid franchise's record for getting his contestant partner to the top of the pyramid in winner's circle in the fastest time: 26 seconds.\nCrystal's earliest prominent role was as Jodie Dallas on \"Soap,\" one of the first unambiguously gay characters in the cast of an American television series. He continued in the role during the series's entire 1977\u20131981 run.\nIn 1982, Billy Crystal hosted his own variety show, \"The Billy Crystal Comedy Hour\" on NBC. When Crystal arrived to shoot the fifth episode, he learned it had been canceled after only the first two aired. After hosting \"Saturday Night Live\" twice, on March 17, 1984 and the show's ninth season finale on May 5, he joined the regular cast for the 1984-85 season. His most famous recurring sketch was his parody of Fernando Lamas, a smarmy talk-show host whose catchphrase, \"You look... mahvelous!\", became a media sensation. Also in the 1980's, Crystal starred in an episode of Shelley Duvall's \"Faerie Tale Theatre\" as the smartest of the three little pigs.\nIn 1996, Crystal was the guest star of the third episode of \"Muppets Tonight\" and hosted three Grammy Awards Telecasts: the 29th Grammys; the 30th Grammys; and the 31st Grammys.\nIn 2015, Crystal co-starred alongside Josh Gad on the FX comedy series \"The Comedians\", which ran for just one season before being canceled.\nFilm career.\nCrystal's first film role was in Joan Rivers' 1978 film \"Rabbit Test\", the story of the \"world's first pregnant man.\"\nCrystal appeared briefly in the Rob Reiner \"rockumentary\" \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984) as Morty The Mime, a waiter dressed as a mime at one of Spinal Tap's parties. He shared the scene with a then-unknown, non-speaking Dana Carvey, stating famously that \"Mime is money.\" He later starred in the action comedy \"Running Scared\" (1986) and was directed by Reiner again in \"The Princess Bride\" (1987), in a comedic supporting role as \"Miracle Max\". Reiner got Crystal to accept the part by saying, \"How would you like to play Mel Brooks?\" Reiner also allowed Crystal to ad-lib, and his parting shot, \"Have fun storming the castle!\" is a frequently-quoted line.\nReiner directed Crystal for a third time in the romantic comedy \"When Harry Met Sally...\" (1989), in which Crystal starred alongside Meg Ryan and for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe. The film has since become an iconic classic for the genre and is Crystal's most celebrated film. Crystal then starred in the award-winning buddy comedy \"City Slickers\" (1991), which proved very successful both commercially and critically and for which Crystal was nominated for his second Golden Globe. The film was followed by a sequel, which was less successful. In 1992, he narrated \"Dr. Seuss Video Classics: Horton Hatches the Egg\". The name of his company is Face Productions.\nFollowing the significant success of these films, Crystal wrote, directed, and starred in \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992) and \"Forget Paris\" (1995). In the former, Crystal played a serious role in aging makeup, as an egotistical comedian who reflects back on his career. Crystal starred in Woody Allen's critically acclaimed comedy ensemble film \"Deconstructing Harry\" (1997). Crystal had another success alongside Robert De Niro in Harold Ramis' mobster comedy \"Analyze This\" (1999). More recent performances include roles in \"America's Sweethearts\" (2001), the sequel \"Analyze That\" (2002), and \"Parental Guidance\" (2012).\nHe directed the made-for-television movie \"61*\" (2001) based on Roger Maris's and Mickey Mantle's race to break Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in 1961. This earned Crystal an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special.\nCrystal was originally asked to voice Buzz Lightyear in \"Toy Story\" (1995) but turned it down, a decision he later regretted due to the popularity of the series. Crystal later went on to provide the voice of Mike Wazowski in the blockbuster Pixar film \"Monsters, Inc.\" (2001), and reprised his voice role in the prequel, \"Monsters University\", which was released in June 2013. Crystal also provided the voice of Calcifer in the English version of Hayao Miyazaki's \"Howl's Moving Castle\" (2004).\nAlbums and music career.\nDue to the success of Crystal's standup and SNL career, in 1985, he released an album of his stand-up material titled \"Mahvelous!\", as well as the single \"You Look Marvelous\", which peaked at No. 58 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the US, and No. 17 in Canada. The title track \"You Look Marvelous\" would also have an accompanying music video that debuted on MTV. Both the song and video features Crystal in character as his SNL persona of talk show host Fernando Lamas. The video features Lamas cruising around in what was at the time the world's longest stretch limousine, built by custom-coach designer and builder Vini Bergeman, surrounded by models in bikinis. The album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Recording at the 1986 Grammy Awards.\nIn 2013, Crystal released his autobiographical memoir \"Still Foolin' Em\". The audiobook version was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album at the 2014 Grammy Awards.\nAcademy Awards host.\nCrystal hosted the Academy Awards broadcast a total of 9 times, from 1990 to 1993, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2004 and 2012. His hosting was critically praised, resulting in two Primetime Emmy Award wins for hosting and writing the 63rd Academy Awards and an Emmy win for writing the 64th Academy Awards. He returned as the host for the 2012 Oscar ceremony, after Eddie Murphy resigned from hosting. His nine times is second only to Bob Hope's 19 in most ceremonies hosted. At the 83rd Academy Awards ceremony in 2011, he appeared as a presenter for a digitally inserted Bob Hope and before doing so was given a standing ovation. Film critic Roger Ebert said when Crystal came onstage about two hours into the show, he got the first laughs of the broadcast. Crystal's hosting gigs have regularly included an introductory video segment in which he comedically inserts himself into scenes of that year's nominees in addition to a song following his opening monologue.\nBroadway.\nCrystal won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event for \"700 Sundays\", a two-act, one-man play, which he conceived and wrote about his parents and his childhood growing up on Long Island. He toured throughout the US with the show in 2006 and then Australia in 2007.\nFollowing the initial success of the play, Crystal wrote the book \"700 Sundays\" for Warner Books, which was published on October 31, 2005. In conjunction with the book and the play that also paid tribute to his uncle, Milt Gabler, Crystal produced two CD compilations: \"Billy Crystal Presents: The Milt Gabler Story\", which featured his uncle's most influential recordings from Billie Holiday's \"Strange Fruit\" to \"Rock Around the Clock\" by Bill Haley &amp; His Comets; and \"Billy Remembers Billie\" featuring Crystal's favorite Holiday recordings.\nIn the fall of 2013, he brought the show back to Broadway for a two-month run at the Imperial Theatre. HBO filmed the January 3\u20134, 2014 performances for a special, which debuted on their network on April 19, 2014.\nOther Appearances.\nIn 2014, Crystal paid tribute to his close friend Robin Williams at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards. In his tribute he talked about their friendship, saying, \"As genius as he was on stage, he was the greatest friend you could ever imagine. Supportive. Protective. Loving. It\u2019s very hard to talk about him in the past because he was so present in all of our lives. For almost 40 years, he was the brightest star in the comedy galaxy\u2026[His] beautiful light will continue to shine on us forever. And the glow will be so bright, it\u2019ll warm your heart. It\u2019ll make your eyes glisten. And you\u2019ll think to yourselves: Robin Williams. What a concept.\u201d Crystal stated that paying tribute to Williams so publicly and so soon after Williams had died was one of \"the hardest things I've had to do\" and that \"I was really worried that I wasn't going to get through it.\" Crystal soon after appeared on \"The View\" where he and Whoopi Goldberg shared stories about Williams, reminiscing about their friendship, and their collaborations together on \"Comic Relief\".\nIn 2016, Crystal gave one of the eulogies for Muhammad Ali at his funeral. In his remembrance of Ali, Crystal talked about his admiration for Ali as a boxer, and humanitarian. He also shared stories of their unlikely friendship after Crystal did a series of impersonations of him. Crystal stated of Ali's legacy, \"Only once in a thousand years or so, do we get to hear a Mozart, or see a Picasso, or read a Shakespeare. Ali was one of them. And yet, at his heart, he was still a kid from Louisville who ran with the gods and walked with the crippled and smiled at the foolishness of it all.\"\nWork.\nFilmography.\nCrystal is known for his numerous roles in film and television. Crystal's first film appearances include (1977), Joan Rivers' \"Rabbit Test\" (1978), and Rob Reiner's \"This is Spinal Tap\" (1984). In 1987, he starred in Reiner's fantasy romance \"The Princess Bride\" as Miracle Max alongside Carol Kane and the dark comedy \"Throw Momma from the Train\" with Danny DeVito. He then starred in Reiner's classic romantic comedy film \"When Harry Met Sally...\" alongside Meg Ryan in 1989. He then executive produced and starred in the western comedy film, \"City Slickers\" (1991). He then wrote, directed and starred in the show business drama, \"Mr. Saturday Night\" in (1992). He continued to act in films such as Kenneth Branagh's \"Hamlet\", Woody Allen's \"Deconstructing Harry\" and the gangster comedy \"Analyze This\" with Robert De Niro. In 2001 Crystal voiced Mike Wazowski in the Pixar animated film \"Monsters, Inc.\" and reprised his role in \"Monsters University\" (2013). He also voiced Calcifer the Fire-Demon in Hayao Miyazaki in \"Howl's Moving Castle\" (2004).\nPersonal life.\nCrystal and his wife Janice (n\u00e9e Goldfinger) married in June 1970. They have two daughters, actress Jennifer and producer Lindsay, and are grandparents. They live in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Pacific Palisades, California.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 1986, Crystal started hosting \"Comic Relief\" on HBO with Robin Williams and Whoopi Goldberg. Founded by Bob Zmuda, Comic Relief raises money for homeless people in the United States.\nOn September 6, 2005, on \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\", Crystal and Jay Leno were the first celebrities to sign a Harley-Davidson motorcycle to be auctioned off for Gulf Coast relief.\nCrystal has participated in the Simon Wiesenthal Center Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles. Crystal's personal history is featured in the \"Finding Our Families, Finding Ourselves\" exhibit in the genealogy wing of the museum.\nSports.\nOn March 12, 2008, Crystal signed a one-day minor league contract to play with the New York Yankees, and was invited to the team's major league spring training. He wore uniform number 60 in honor of his upcoming 60th birthday. On March 13, in a spring training game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Crystal led off as the designated hitter. He managed to make contact, fouling a fastball up the first base line, but was eventually struck out by Pirates pitcher Paul Maholm on six pitches and was later replaced in the batting order by Johnny Damon. He was released on March 14, his 60th birthday.\nCrystal's boyhood idol was Yankee Hall of Fame legend Mickey Mantle who had signed a program for him when Crystal attended a game where Mantle had hit a home run. Years later on \"The Dinah Shore Show\", in one of his first television appearances, Crystal met Mantle in person and had Mantle re-sign the same program. Crystal would be good friends with Mickey Mantle until Mantle's death in 1995. He and Bob Costas together wrote the eulogy Costas read at Mantle's funeral, and George Steinbrenner then invited Crystal to emcee the unveiling of Mantle's monument at Yankee Stadium. In his 2013 memoir \"Still Foolin' 'Em\", Crystal writes that after the ceremony, near the Yankee clubhouse, he was punched in the stomach by Joe DiMaggio, who was angry at Crystal for not having introduced him to the crowd as the \"Greatest living player\".\nCrystal also was well known for his impressions of Yankee Hall of Famer turned broadcaster Phil Rizzuto. Rizzuto, known for his quirks calling games, did not travel to Anaheim, California in 1996 to call the game for WPIX. Instead, Crystal joined the broadcasters in the booth and pretended to be Rizzuto for a few minutes during the August 31st game.\nAlthough a lifelong Yankee fan, he is a part-owner of the Arizona Diamondbacks, even earning a World Series ring in 2001 when the Diamondbacks beat his beloved Yankees.\nIn \"City Slickers\", Crystal wears a New York Mets baseball cap. In the 1986 film \"Running Scared\", his character is an avid Chicago Cubs fan, wearing a Cubs' jersey in several scenes. In the 2012 film \"Parental Guidance\", his character is the announcer for the Fresno Grizzlies, a Minor League Baseball team, and aspires to announce for their Major League affiliate, the San Francisco Giants.\nCrystal appeared in Ken Burns's 1994 documentary \"Baseball\", telling personal stories about his life-long love of baseball, including meeting Casey Stengel as a child and Ted Williams as an adult.\nCrystal is also a longtime Los Angeles Clippers fan and season ticket holder."}
{"id": "4650", "revid": "11173496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4650", "title": "Black hole", "text": "A black hole is a region of spacetime where gravity is so strong that nothing\u2014no particles or even electromagnetic radiation such as light\u2014can escape from it. The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.\nThe boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although the event horizon has an enormous effect on the fate and circumstances of an object crossing it, according to general relativity it has no locally detectable features. In many ways, a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light. Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe directly.\nObjects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, and its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967 sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.\nBlack holes of stellar mass form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses () may form. There is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.\nThe presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming quasars, some of the brightest objects in the universe. Stars passing too close to a supermassive black hole can be shred into streamers that shine very brightly before being \"swallowed.\" If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3\u00a0million solar masses.\nOn 11 February 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves, which also represented the first observation of a black hole merger. , eleven gravitational wave events have been observed that originated from ten merging black holes (along with one binary neutron star merger). On 10 April 2019, the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published, following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope in 2017 of the supermassive black hole in Messier 87's galactic centre.\nHistory.\nThe idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by astronomical pioneer and English clergyman John Michell in a letter published in November 1784. Michell's simplistic calculations assumed such a body might have the same density as the Sun, and concluded that such a body would form when a star's diameter exceeds the Sun's by a factor of 500, and the surface escape velocity exceeds the usual speed of light. Michell correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies. Scholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible stars might be hiding in plain view, but enthusiasm dampened when the wavelike nature of light became apparent in the early nineteenth century.\nIf light were a wave rather than a \"corpuscle\", it is unclear what, if any, influence gravity would have on escaping light waves. Modern physics discredits Michell's notion of a light ray shooting directly from the surface of a supermassive star, being slowed down by the star's gravity, stopping, and then free-falling back to the star's surface.\nGeneral relativity.\nIn 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass. A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties. This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington\u2013Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lema\u00eetre to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was a non-physical coordinate singularity. Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because \"a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the Sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere).\"\nIn 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at ) has no stable solutions. His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse. They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, which is itself stable. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above another limit (the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit) would collapse further for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes. Their original calculations, based on the Pauli exclusion principle, gave it as ; subsequent consideration of strong force-mediated neutron-neutron repulsion raised the estimate to approximately to . Observations of the neutron star merger GW170817, which is thought to have generated a black hole shortly afterward, have refined the TOV limit estimate to ~.\nOppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called \"frozen stars\", because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it to the Schwarzschild radius.\nGolden age.\nIn 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, \"a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction\". This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.\nThese results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967, which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.\nIn this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged. Through the work of Werner Israel, Brandon Carter, and David Robinson the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr\u2013Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.\nAt first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically. For this work, Penrose received half of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics, Hawking having died in 2018.\nWork by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory implies that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, predicting the effect now known as Hawking radiation.\nEtymology.\nJohn Michell used the term \"dark star\", and in the early 20th century, physicists used the term \"gravitationally collapsed object\". Science writer Marcia Bartusiak traces the term \"black hole\" to physicist Robert H. Dicke, who in the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the Black Hole of Calcutta, notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive.\nThe term \"black hole\" was used in print by \"Life\" and \"Science News\" magazines in 1963, and by science journalist Ann Ewing in her article Black Holes' in Space\", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cleveland, Ohio.\nIn December 1967, a student reportedly suggested the phrase \"black hole\" at a lecture by John Wheeler; Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and \"advertising value\", and it quickly caught on, leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.\nProperties and structure.\nThe no-hair theorem postulates that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, electric charge, and angular momentum; the black hole is otherwise featureless. If the conjecture is true, any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable from one another. The degree to which the conjecture is true for real black holes under the laws of modern physics is currently an unsolved problem.\nThese properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law (through the ADM mass), far away from the black hole. Likewise, the angular momentum (or spin) can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field, through for example the Lense-Thirring effect.\nWhen an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance\u2014the membrane paradigm. This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.\nPhysical properties.\nThe simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916. According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric. This means there is no observable difference at a distance between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole \"sucking in everything\" in its surroundings is therefore correct only near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.\nSolutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr\u2013Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.\nWhile the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge\u00a0\"Q\" and the total angular momentum\u00a0\"J\" are expected to satisfy\nfor a black hole of mass \"M\". Black holes with the minimum possible mass satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed \"unphysical\". The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. This is supported by numerical simulations.\nDue to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a universal feature of compact astrophysical objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value. That uncharged limit is\nallowing definition of a dimensionless spin parameter such that\nBlack holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum, \"J\". The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is proportional to the mass, \"M\", through\nwhere \"r\" is the Schwarzschild radius and is the mass of the Sun. For a black hole with nonzero spin and/or electric charge, the radius is smaller, until an extremal black hole could have an event horizon close to\nEvent horizon.\nThe defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon\u2014a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can pass only inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine whether such an event occurred.\nAs predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass. At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.\nTo a distant observer, clocks near a black hole would appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole. Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it. At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the viewpoint of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift. Eventually, the falling object fades away until it can no longer be seen. Typically this process happens very rapidly with an object disappearing from view within less than a second.\nOn the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; in classical general relativity, it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations, due to Einstein's equivalence principle.\nThe topology of the event horizon of a black hole at equilibrium is always spherical. For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the event horizon is oblate.\nSingularity.\nAt the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, may lie a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite. For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation. In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution. The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.\nObservers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit. When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the \"noodle effect\".\nIn the case of a charged (Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole. The possibility of traveling to another universe is, however, only theoretical since any perturbation would destroy this possibility. It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which leads to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox. It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.\nThe appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory. This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.\nPhoton sphere.\nThe photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.\nWhile light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon. For a Kerr black hole the radius of the photon sphere depends on the spin parameter and on the details of the photon orbit, which can be prograde (the photon rotates in the same sense of the black hole spin) or retrograde.\nErgosphere.\nRotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly \"drag\" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.\nThe ergosphere of a black hole is a volume bounded by the black hole's event horizon and the \"ergosurface\", which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but is at a much greater distance around the equator.\nObjects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered with. The extra energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole. Thereby the rotation of the black hole slows down. A variation of the Penrose process in the presence of strong magnetic fields, the Blandford\u2013Znajek process is considered a likely mechanism for the enormous luminosity and relativistic jets of quasars and other active galactic nuclei.\nInnermost stable circular orbit (ISCO).\nIn Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole. The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:\nand decreases with increasing black hole spin for particles orbiting in the same direction as the spin.\nFormation and evolution.\nGiven the bizarre character of black holes, it was long questioned whether such objects could actually exist in nature or whether they were merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius. This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects, and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.\nPenrose demonstrated that once an event horizon forms, general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within. Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see \"Penrose\u2013Hawking singularity theorems\"). The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research. Conventional black holes are formed by gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but they can also in theory be formed by other processes.\nGravitational collapse.\nGravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little \"fuel\" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.\nThe collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. Which type forms depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left if the outer layers have been blown away (for example, in a Type II supernova). The mass of the remnant, the collapsed object that survives the explosion, can be substantially less than that of the original star. Remnants exceeding are produced by stars that were over before the collapse.\nIf the mass of the remnant exceeds about (the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.\nThe gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to . These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies. It has further been suggested that massive black holes with typical masses of ~ could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe. These massive objects have been proposed as the seeds that eventually formed the earliest quasars observed already at redshift formula_7. Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.\nWhile most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.\nPrimordial black holes and the Big Bang.\nGravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are found only in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the Big Bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. High density alone is not enough to allow black hole formation since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to have formed in such a dense medium, there must have been initial density perturbations that could then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the scale of these fluctuations. Various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging in size from a Planck mass (\"m\"= \u2248 \u2248 ) to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.\nDespite the early universe being extremely dense\u2014far denser than is usually required to form a black hole\u2014it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the Big Bang. Models for the gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size, such as stars, do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the Big Bang.\nHigh-energy collisions.\nGravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments. This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass, where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity. This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the minimum black hole mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as . This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists. Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.\nGrowth.\nOnce a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings. This growth process is one possible way through which some supermassive black holes may have been formed, although the formation of supermassive black holes is still an open field of research. A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters. Black holes can also merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. This is thought to have been important, especially in the early growth of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects. The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.\nEvaporation.\nIn 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation at a temperature \u210f\u00a0\"c\"/(8\u00a0\u03c0\u00a0\"G\"\u00a0\"M\"\u00a0\"k\"); this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches. If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles. The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.\nA stellar black hole of has a Hawking temperature of 62\u00a0nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7\u00a0K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking. To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7\u00a0K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.\nIf a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10\u00a0m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1\u00a0TeV/\"c\" would take less than 10 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravity effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate this is the case.\nThe Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes. NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.\nIf black holes evaporate via Hawking radiation, a solar mass black hole will evaporate (beginning once the temperature of the cosmic microwave background drops below that of the black hole) over a period of 10 years. A supermassive black hole with a mass of will evaporate in around 2\u00d710 years. Some monster black holes in the universe are predicted to continue to grow up to perhaps during the collapse of superclusters of galaxies. Even these would evaporate over a timescale of up to 10 years.\nObservational evidence.\nBy nature, black holes do not themselves emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational influence upon its surroundings.\nOn 10 April 2019 an image was released of a black hole, which is seen in magnified fashion because the light paths near the event horizon are highly bent. The dark shadow in the middle results from light paths absorbed by the black hole. The image is in false color, as the detected light halo in this image is not in the visible spectrum, but radio waves.\nThe Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), is an active program that directly observes the immediate environment of the event horizon of black holes, such as the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. In April 2017, EHT began observation of the black hole in the center of Messier 87. \"In all, eight radio observatories on six mountains and four continents observed the galaxy in Virgo on and off for 10 days in April 2017\" to provide the data yielding the image two years later in April 2019. After two years of data processing, EHT released the first direct image of a black hole, specifically the supermassive black hole that lies in the center of the aforementioned galaxy. What is visible is not the black hole, which shows as black because of the loss of all light within this dark region, rather it is the gases at the edge of the event horizon, which are displayed as orange or red, that define the black hole.\nThe brightening of this material in the 'bottom' half of the processed EHT image is thought to be caused by Doppler beaming, whereby material approaching the viewer at relativistic speeds is perceived as brighter than material moving away. In the case of a black hole this phenomenon implies that the visible material is rotating at relativistic speeds (&gt;1,000\u00a0km/s), the only speeds at which it is possible to centrifugally balance the immense gravitational attraction of the singularity, and thereby remain in orbit above the event horizon. This configuration of bright material implies that the EHT observed M87* from a perspective catching the black hole's accretion disc nearly edge-on, as the whole system rotated clockwise. However, the extreme gravitational lensing associated with black holes produces the illusion of a perspective that sees the accretion disc from above. In reality, most of the ring in the EHT image was created when the light emitted by the far side of the accretion disc bent around the black hole's gravity well and escaped; this means that most of the possible perspectives on M87* can see the entire disc, even that directly behind the \"shadow\".\nPrior to this, in 2015, the EHT detected magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, and even discerned some of their properties. The field lines that pass through the accretion disc were found to be a complex mixture of ordered and tangled. The existence of magnetic fields had been predicted by theoretical studies of black holes.\nDetection of gravitational waves from merging black holes.\nOn 14 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful direct observation of gravitational waves. The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses. This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects prior to the merger was just 350\u00a0km (or roughly four times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.\nMore importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole. From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger. The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere; however, it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.\nThe observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.\nSince then many more gravitational wave events have been observed.\nProper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*.\nThe proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole. Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars. Since then, one of the stars\u2014called S2\u2014has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to and a radius of less than 0.002 light-years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars. The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume. Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.\nAccretion of matter.\nDue to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disk-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space body hiding the part of the disk just behind it, but in reality gravitational lensing would greatly distort the image of the accretion disk.\nWithin such a disk, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall farther inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.\nWhen the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disk orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disk to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation. (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion disks are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood, in part due to insufficient data.\nAs such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion disks of supermassive black holes. Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion. It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.\nIn November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.\nX-ray binaries.\nX-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.\nIf such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit (the maximum mass a star can have without collapsing) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.\nThe first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster, and Paul Murdin in 1972. Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole. Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients. In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10\u201350 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disk is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cygni.\nQuasi-periodic oscillations.\nThe X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.\nGalactic nuclei.\nAstronomers use the term \"active galaxy\" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of interstellar gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.\nAlthough supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.\nIt is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole. The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and that of the galaxy itself.\nMicrolensing (proposed).\nAnother way the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole. One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.\nAlternatives.\nThe evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound. A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars. Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars. These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.\nSince the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a black hole is comparable to that of water). Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.\nThe evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts. For example, in the fuzzball model based on string theory, the individual states of a black hole solution do not generally have an event horizon or singularity, but for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.\nA few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically, but which function via a different mechanism. These include the gravastar, the black star, and the dark-energy star.\nOpen questions.\nEntropy and thermodynamics.\nIn 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge. This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.\nThe link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.\nOne puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.\nAlthough general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein\u2013Hawking entropy. Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.\nInformation loss paradox.\nBecause a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside, but represented on the event horizon in accordance with the holographic principle. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.\nThe question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne\u2013Hawking\u2013Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of a property called unitarity, and it has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy, though this has also been disputed. Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.\nOne attempt to resolve the black hole information paradox is known as black hole complementarity. In 2012, the \"firewall paradox\" was introduced with the goal of demonstrating that black hole complementarity fails to solve the information paradox. According to quantum field theory in curved spacetime, a single emission of Hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles. The outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of Hawking radiation; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole. Assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future. Then, it will emit only a finite amount of information encoded within its Hawking radiation. According to research by physicists like Don Page and Leonard Susskind, there will eventually be a time by which an outgoing particle must be entangled with all the Hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted. This seemingly creates a paradox: a principle called \"monogamy of entanglement\" requires that, like any quantum system, the outgoing particle cannot be fully entangled with two other systems at the same time; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled both with the infalling particle and, independently, with past Hawking radiation. In order to resolve this contradiction, physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested principles: Einstein's equivalence principle, unitarity, or local quantum field theory. One possible solution, which violates the equivalence principle, is that a \"firewall\" destroys incoming particles at the event horizon.&lt;ref name=\"sciam/Confound\"&gt; Originally published in \"Quanta Magazine\", 21 December 2012.&lt;/ref&gt; In general, which if any of these assumptions should be abandoned remains a topic of debate."}
{"id": "4651", "revid": "1011844229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4651", "title": "Beta decay", "text": " \nIn nuclear physics, beta decay (\"\u03b2\"-decay) is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta particle (fast energetic electron or positron) is emitted from an atomic nucleus, transforming the original nuclide to an isobar of that nuclide. For example, beta decay of a neutron transforms it into a proton by the emission of an electron accompanied by an antineutrino; or, conversely a proton is converted into a neutron by the emission of a positron with a neutrino in so-called \"positron emission\". Neither the beta particle nor its associated (anti-)neutrino exist within the nucleus prior to beta decay, but are created in the decay process. By this process, unstable atoms obtain a more stable ratio of protons to neutrons. The probability of a nuclide decaying due to beta and other forms of decay is determined by its nuclear binding energy. The binding energies of all existing nuclides form what is called the nuclear band or valley of stability. For either electron or positron emission to be energetically possible, the energy release (see below) or \"Q\" value must be positive.\nBeta decay is a consequence of the weak force, which is characterized by relatively lengthy decay times. Nucleons are composed of up quarks and down quarks, and the weak force allows a quark to change its flavour by emission of a W boson leading to creation of an electron/antineutrino or positron/neutrino pair. For example, a neutron, composed of two down quarks and an up quark, decays to a proton composed of a down quark and two up quarks.\nElectron capture is sometimes included as a type of beta decay, because the basic nuclear process, mediated by the weak force, is the same. In electron capture, an inner atomic electron is captured by a proton in the nucleus, transforming it into a neutron, and an electron neutrino is released.\nDescription.\nThe two types of beta decay are known as \"beta minus\" and \"beta plus\". In beta minus (\u03b2\u2212) decay, a neutron is converted to a proton, and the process creates an electron and an electron antineutrino; while in beta plus (\u03b2+) decay, a proton is converted to a neutron and the process creates a positron and an electron neutrino. \u03b2+ decay is also known as positron emission.\nBeta decay conserves a quantum number known as the lepton number, or the number of electrons and their associated neutrinos (other leptons are the muon and tau particles). These particles have lepton number +1, while their antiparticles have lepton number \u22121. Since a proton or neutron has lepton number zero, \u03b2+ decay (a positron, or antielectron) must be accompanied with an electron neutrino, while \u03b2\u2212 decay (an electron) must be accompanied by an electron antineutrino.\nAn example of electron emission (\u03b2\u2212 decay) is the decay of carbon-14 into nitrogen-14 with a half-life of about 5,730 years:\nIn this form of decay, the original element becomes a new chemical element in a process known as nuclear transmutation. This new element has an unchanged mass number , but an atomic number that is increased by one. As in all nuclear decays, the decaying element (in this case ) is known as the \"parent nuclide\" while the resulting element (in this case ) is known as the \"daughter nuclide\".\nAnother example is the decay of hydrogen-3 (tritium) into helium-3 with a half-life of about 12.3 years:\nAn example of positron emission (\u03b2+ decay) is the decay of magnesium-23 into sodium-23 with a half-life of about 11.3 s:\n\u03b2+ decay also results in nuclear transmutation, with the resulting element having an atomic number that is decreased by one.\nThe beta spectrum, or distribution of energy values for the beta particles, is continuous. The total energy of the decay process is divided between the electron, the antineutrino, and the recoiling nuclide. In the figure to the right, an example of an electron with 0.40 MeV energy from the beta decay of 210Bi is shown. In this example, the total decay energy is 1.16 MeV, so the antineutrino has the remaining energy: . An electron at the far right of the curve would have the maximum possible kinetic energy, leaving the energy of the neutrino to be only its small rest mass.\nHistory.\nDiscovery and initial characterization.\nRadioactivity was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel in uranium, and subsequently observed by Marie and Pierre Curie in thorium and in the new elements polonium and radium. In 1899, Ernest Rutherford separated radioactive emissions into two types: alpha and beta (now beta minus), based on penetration of objects and ability to cause ionization. Alpha rays could be stopped by thin sheets of paper or aluminium, whereas beta rays could penetrate several millimetres of aluminium. In 1900, Paul Villard identified a still more penetrating type of radiation, which Rutherford identified as a fundamentally new type in 1903 and termed gamma rays. Alpha, beta, and gamma are the first three letters of the Greek alphabet.\nIn 1900, Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio () for beta particles by the method of J.J.\u00a0Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that for a beta particle is the same as for Thomson's electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.\nIn 1901, Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed that alpha and beta radioactivity involves the transmutation of atoms into atoms of other chemical elements. In 1913, after the products of more radioactive decays were known, Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently proposed their radioactive displacement law, which states that beta (i.e., )\u00a0emission from one element produces another element one place to the right in the periodic table, while alpha emission produces an element two places to the left.\nNeutrinos.\nThe study of beta decay provided the first physical evidence for the existence of the neutrino. In both alpha and gamma decay, the resulting alpha or gamma particle has a narrow energy distribution, since the particle carries the energy from the difference between the initial and final nuclear states. However, the kinetic energy distribution, or spectrum, of beta particles measured by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn in 1911 and by Jean Danysz in 1913 showed multiple lines on a diffuse background. These measurements offered the first hint that beta particles have a continuous spectrum. In 1914, James Chadwick used a magnetic spectrometer with one of Hans Geiger's new counters to make more accurate measurements which showed that the spectrum was continuous. The distribution of beta particle energies was in apparent contradiction to the law of conservation of energy. If beta decay were simply electron emission as assumed at the time, then the energy of the emitted electron should have a particular, well-defined value. For beta decay, however, the observed broad distribution of energies suggested that energy is lost in the beta decay process. This spectrum was puzzling for many years.\nA second problem is related to the conservation of angular momentum. Molecular band spectra showed that the nuclear spin of nitrogen-14 is 1 (i.e., equal to the reduced Planck constant) and more generally that the spin is integral for nuclei of even mass number and half-integral for nuclei of odd mass number. This was later explained by the proton-neutron model of the nucleus. Beta decay leaves the mass number unchanged, so the change of nuclear spin must be an integer. However, the electron spin is 1/2, hence angular momentum would not be conserved if beta decay were simply electron emission.\nFrom 1920 to 1927, Charles Drummond Ellis (along with Chadwick and colleagues) further established that the beta decay spectrum is continuous. In 1933, Ellis and Nevill Mott obtained strong evidence that the beta spectrum has an effective upper bound in energy. Niels Bohr had suggested that the beta spectrum could be explained if conservation of energy was true only in a statistical sense, thus this principle might be violated in any given decay. However, the upper bound in beta energies determined by Ellis and Mott ruled out that notion. Now, the problem of how to account for the variability of energy in known beta decay products, as well as for conservation of momentum and angular momentum in the process, became acute.\nIn a famous letter written in 1930, Wolfgang Pauli attempted to resolve the beta-particle energy conundrum by suggesting that, in addition to electrons and protons, atomic nuclei also contained an extremely light neutral particle, which he called the neutron. He suggested that this \"neutron\" was also emitted during beta decay (thus accounting for the known missing energy, momentum, and angular momentum), but it had simply not yet been observed. In 1931, Enrico Fermi renamed Pauli's \"neutron\" the \"neutrino\" ('little neutral one' in Italian). In 1933, Fermi published his landmark theory for beta decay, where he applied the principles of quantum mechanics to matter particles, supposing that they can be created and annihilated, just as the light quanta in atomic transitions. Thus, according to Fermi, neutrinos are created in the beta-decay process, rather than contained in the nucleus; the same happens to electrons. The neutrino interaction with matter was so weak that detecting it proved a severe experimental challenge. Further indirect evidence of the existence of the neutrino was obtained by observing the recoil of nuclei that emitted such a particle after absorbing an electron. Neutrinos were finally detected directly in 1956 by Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines in the Cowan\u2013Reines neutrino experiment. The properties of neutrinos were (with a few minor modifications) as predicted by Pauli and Fermi.\ndecay and electron capture.\nIn 1934, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric and Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie bombarded aluminium with alpha particles to effect the nuclear reaction \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192 \u00a0+\u00a0, and observed that the product isotope emits a positron identical to those found in cosmic rays (discovered by Carl David Anderson in 1932). This was the first example of \u00a0decay (positron emission), which they termed artificial radioactivity since is a short-lived nuclide which does not exist in nature. In recognition of their discovery the couple were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935.\nThe theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed in 1937 by Luis Alvarez, in the nuclide 48V. Alvarez went on to study electron capture in 67Ga and other nuclides.\nNon-conservation of parity.\nIn 1956, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang noticed that there was no evidence that parity was conserved in weak interactions, and so they postulated that this symmetry may not be preserved by the weak force. They sketched the design for an experiment for testing conservation of parity in the laboratory. Later that year, Chien-Shiung Wu and coworkers conducted the Wu experiment showing an asymmetrical beta decay of cobalt-60 at cold temperatures that proved that parity is not conserved in beta decay. This surprising result overturned long-held assumptions about parity and the weak force. In recognition of their theoretical work, Lee and Yang were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957. However Wu, who was female, was not awarded the Nobel prize.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay.\nIn \u00a0decay, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number increased by one, while emitting an electron () and an electron antineutrino (). \u00a0decay generally occurs in neutron-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\nwhere and are the mass number and atomic number of the decaying nucleus, and X and X\u2032 are the initial and final elements, respectively.\nAnother example is when the free neutron () decays by \u00a0decay into a proton ():\nAt the fundamental level (as depicted in the Feynman diagram on the right), this is caused by the conversion of the negatively charged (\u2212\u00a0e) down quark to the positively charged (+\u00a0e) up quark by emission of a boson; the boson subsequently decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino:\n\u03b2+ decay.\nIn \u00a0decay, or positron emission, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number decreased by one, while emitting a positron () and an electron neutrino (). \u00a0decay generally occurs in proton-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\nThis may be considered as the decay of a proton inside the nucleus to a neutron:\nHowever, \u00a0decay cannot occur in an isolated proton because it requires energy, due to the mass of the neutron being greater than the mass of the proton. \u00a0decay can only happen inside nuclei when the daughter nucleus has a greater binding energy (and therefore a lower total energy) than the mother nucleus. The difference between these energies goes into the reaction of converting a proton into a neutron, a positron and a neutrino and into the kinetic energy of these particles. This process is opposite to negative beta decay, in that the weak interaction converts a proton into a neutron by converting an up quark into a down quark resulting in the emission of a or the absorption of a . When a boson is emitted, it decays into a positron and an electron neutrino:\nElectron capture (K-capture).\nIn all cases where \u00a0decay (positron emission) of a nucleus is allowed energetically, so too is electron capture allowed. This is a process during which a nucleus captures one of its atomic electrons, resulting in the emission of a neutrino:\nAn example of electron capture is one of the decay modes of krypton-81 into bromine-81:\nAll emitted neutrinos are of the same energy. In proton-rich nuclei where the energy difference between the initial and final states is less than , \u00a0decay is not energetically possible, and electron capture is the sole decay mode.\nIf the captured electron comes from the innermost shell of the atom, the K-shell, which has the highest probability to interact with the nucleus, the process is called K-capture. If it comes from the L-shell, the process is called L-capture, etc.\nElectron capture is a competing (simultaneous) decay process for all nuclei that can undergo \u03b2+ decay. The converse, however, is not true: electron capture is the \"only\" type of decay that is allowed in proton-rich nuclides that do not have sufficient energy to emit a positron and neutrino.\nNuclear transmutation.\nIf the proton and neutron are part of an atomic nucleus, the above described decay processes transmute one chemical element into another. For example:\nBeta decay does not change the number\u00a0() of nucleons in the nucleus, but changes only its charge\u00a0. Thus the set of all nuclides with the same\u00a0 can be introduced; these \"isobaric\" nuclides may turn into each other via beta decay. For a given there is one that is most stable. It is said to be beta stable, because it presents a local minima of the mass excess: if such a nucleus has numbers, the neighbour nuclei and have higher mass excess and can beta decay into , but not vice versa. For all odd mass numbers , there is only one known beta-stable isobar. For even\u00a0, there are up to three different beta-stable isobars experimentally known; for example, , , and are all beta-stable. There are about 350 known beta-decay stable nuclides.\nCompetition of beta decay types.\nUsually unstable nuclides are clearly either \"neutron rich\" or \"proton rich\", with the former undergoing beta decay and the latter undergoing electron capture (or more rarely, due to the higher energy requirements, positron decay). However, in a few cases of odd-proton, odd-neutron radionuclides, it may be energetically favorable for the radionuclide to decay to an even-proton, even-neutron isobar either by undergoing beta-positive or beta-negative decay. An often-cited example is the single isotope (29 protons, 35 neutrons), which illustrates three types of beta decay in competition. Copper-64 has a half-life of about 12.7 hours. This isotope has one unpaired proton and one unpaired neutron, so either the proton or the neutron can decay. This particular nuclide (though not all nuclides in this situation) is almost equally likely to decay through proton decay by positron emission (18%) or electron capture (43%) to , as it is through neutron decay by electron emission (39%) to .\nStability of naturally occurring nuclides.\nMost naturally occurring nuclides on earth are beta stable. Those that are not have half-lives ranging from under a second to periods of time significantly greater than the age of the universe. One common example of a long-lived isotope is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide , which undergoes all three types of beta decay (, and electron capture) with a half-life of .\nConservation rules for beta decay.\nBaryon number is conserved.\nwhere\nBeta decay just changes neutron to proton or, in the case of positive beta decay (electron capture) proton to neutron so the number of individual quarks doesn't change. It is only the baryon flavor that changes, here labelled as the isospin.\nUp and down quarks have total isospin formula_4 and isospin projections\nAll other quarks have .\nIn general\nLepton number is conserved.\nso all leptons have assigned a value of +1, antileptons \u22121, and non-leptonic particles 0. \nAngular momentum.\nFor allowed decays, the net orbital angular momentum is zero, hence only spin quantum numbers are considered.\nThe electron and antineutrino are fermions, spin-1/2 objects, therefore they may couple to total formula_9 (parallel) or formula_10 (anti-parallel).\nFor forbidden decays, orbital angular momentum must also be taken into consideration.\nEnergy release.\nThe value is defined as the total energy released in a given nuclear decay. In beta decay, is therefore also the sum of the kinetic energies of the emitted beta particle, neutrino, and recoiling nucleus. (Because of the large mass of the nucleus compared to that of the beta particle and neutrino, the kinetic energy of the recoiling nucleus can generally be neglected.) Beta particles can therefore be emitted with any kinetic energy ranging from 0 to . A typical is around 1\u00a0MeV, but can range from a few keV to a few tens of MeV.\nSince the rest mass of the electron is 511\u00a0keV, the most energetic beta particles are ultrarelativistic, with speeds very close to the speed of light.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay.\nConsider the generic equation for beta decay\nThe value for this decay is\nwhere formula_12 is the mass of the nucleus of the atom, formula_13 is the mass of the electron, and formula_14 is the mass of the electron antineutrino. In other words, the total energy released is the mass energy of the initial nucleus, minus the mass energy of the final nucleus, electron, and antineutrino. The mass of the nucleus is related to the standard atomic mass by\nThat is, the total atomic mass is the mass of the nucleus, plus the mass of the electrons, minus the sum of all \"electron\" binding energies for the atom. This equation is rearranged to find formula_12, and formula_17 is found similarly. Substituting these nuclear masses into the -value equation, while neglecting the nearly-zero antineutrino mass and the difference in electron binding energies, which is very small for high- atoms, we have\nThis energy is carried away as kinetic energy by the electron and neutrino.\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the \u00a0value is positive, \u03b2\u2212 decay can occur when the mass of atom is greater than the mass of atom .\n\u03b2+ decay.\nThe equations for \u03b2+ decay are similar, with the generic equation\ngiving\nHowever, in this equation, the electron masses do not cancel, and we are left with\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the \u00a0value is positive, \u03b2+ decay can occur when the mass of atom exceeds that of by at least twice the mass of the electron.\nElectron capture.\nThe analogous calculation for electron capture must take into account the binding energy of the electrons. This is because the atom will be left in an excited state after capturing the electron, and the binding energy of the captured innermost electron is significant. Using the generic equation for electron capture\nwe have\nwhich simplifies to\nwhere is the binding energy of the captured electron.\nBecause the binding energy of the electron is much less than the mass of the electron, nuclei that can undergo \u03b2+ decay can always also undergo electron capture, but the reverse is not true.\nBeta emission spectrum.\nBeta decay can be considered as a perturbation as described in quantum mechanics, and thus Fermi's Golden Rule can be applied. This leads to an expression for the kinetic energy spectrum of emitted betas as follows:\nwhere is the kinetic energy, is a shape function that depends on the forbiddenness of the decay (it is constant for allowed decays), is the Fermi Function (see below) with \"Z\" the charge of the final-state nucleus, is the total energy, is the momentum, and is the Q value of the decay. The kinetic energy of the emitted neutrino is given approximately by minus the kinetic energy of the beta.\nAs an example, the beta decay spectrum of 210Bi (originally called RaE) is shown to the right.\nFermi function.\nThe Fermi function that appears in the beta spectrum formula accounts for the Coulomb attraction / repulsion between the emitted beta and the final state nucleus. Approximating the associated wavefunctions to be spherically symmetric, the Fermi function can be analytically calculated to be:\nwhere is the final momentum, \u0393 the Gamma function, and (if is the fine-structure constant and the radius of the final state nucleus) , ( for electrons, for positrons), and .\nFor non-relativistic betas (), this expression can be approximated by:\nOther approximations can be found in the literature.\nKurie plot.\nA Kurie plot (also known as a Fermi\u2013Kurie plot) is a graph used in studying beta decay developed by Franz N. D. Kurie, in which the square root of the number of beta particles whose momenta (or energy) lie within a certain narrow range, divided by the Fermi function, is plotted against beta-particle energy. It is a straight line for allowed transitions and some forbidden transitions, in accord with the Fermi beta-decay theory. The energy-axis (x-axis) intercept of a Kurie plot corresponds to the maximum energy imparted to the electron/positron (the decay's \u00a0value). With a Kurie plot one can find the limit on the effective mass of a neutrino.\nHelicity (polarization) of neutrinos, electrons and positrons emitted in beta decay.\nAfter the discovery of parity non-conservation (see History), it was found that, in beta decay, electrons are emitted mostly with negative helicity, i.e., they move, naively speaking, like left-handed screws driven into a material (they have negative longitudinal polarization). Conversely, positrons have mostly positive helicity, i.e., they move like right-handed screws. Neutrinos (emitted in positron decay) have negative helicity, while antineutrinos (emitted in electron decay) have positive helicity.\nThe higher the energy of the particles, the higher their polarization.\nTypes of beta decay transitions.\nBeta decays can be classified according to the angular momentum (\u00a0value) and total spin (\u00a0value) of the emitted radiation. Since total angular momentum must be conserved, including orbital and spin angular momentum, beta decay occurs by a variety of quantum state transitions to various nuclear angular momentum or spin states, known as \"Fermi\" or \"Gamow\u2013Teller\" transitions. When beta decay particles carry no angular momentum (), the decay is referred to as \"allowed\", otherwise it is \"forbidden\".\nOther decay modes, which are rare, are known as bound state decay and double beta decay.\nFermi transitions.\nA Fermi transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_10, leading to an angular momentum change formula_27 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition). In the non-relativistic limit, the nuclear part of the operator for a Fermi transition is given by\nwith formula_29 the weak vector coupling constant, formula_30 the isospin raising and lowering operators, and formula_31 running over all protons and neutrons in the nucleus.\nGamow\u2013Teller transitions.\nA Gamow\u2013Teller transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_9, leading to an angular momentum change formula_33 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition).\nIn this case, the nuclear part of the operator is given by\nwith formula_35 the weak axial-vector coupling constant, and formula_36 the spin Pauli matrices, which can produce a spin-flip in the decaying nucleon.\nForbidden transitions.\nWhen , the decay is referred to as \"forbidden\". Nuclear selection rules require high \u00a0values to be accompanied by changes in nuclear spin\u00a0() and parity\u00a0(\u03c0). The selection rules for the th forbidden transitions are:\nwhere or corresponds to no parity change or parity change, respectively. The special case of a transition between isobaric analogue states, where the structure of the final state is very similar to the structure of the initial state, is referred to as \"superallowed\" for beta decay, and proceeds very quickly. The following table lists the \u0394 and \u0394\u03c0 values for the first few values of\u00a0:\nRare decay modes.\nBound-state \u03b2\u2212 decay.\nA very small minority of free neutron decays (about four per million) are so-called \"two-body decays\", in which the proton, electron and antineutrino are produced, but the electron fails to gain the 13.6 eV energy necessary to escape the proton, and therefore simply remains bound to it, as a neutral hydrogen atom. In this type of beta decay, in essence all of the neutron decay energy is carried off by the antineutrino.\nFor fully ionized atoms (bare nuclei), it is possible in likewise manner for electrons to fail to escape the atom, and to be emitted from the nucleus into low-lying atomic bound states (orbitals). This cannot occur for neutral atoms with low-lying bound states which are already filled by electrons.\nBound-state \u03b2 decays were predicted by Daudel, Jean, and Lecoin in 1947, and the phenomenon in fully ionized atoms was first observed for 163Dy66+ in 1992 by Jung et al. of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research group. Although neutral 163Dy is a stable isotope, the fully ionized 163Dy66+ undergoes \u03b2\u00a0decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47\u00a0days.\nAnother possibility is that a fully ionized atom undergoes greatly accelerated \u03b2\u00a0decay, as observed for 187Re by Bosch et al., also at Darmstadt. Neutral 187Re does undergo \u03b2\u00a0decay with a half-life of 41.6\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0109\u00a0years, but for fully ionized 187Re75+ this is shortened to only 32.9\u00a0years. For comparison the variation of decay rates of other nuclear processes due to chemical environment is less than 1%.\nDouble beta decay.\nSome nuclei can undergo double beta decay (\u03b2\u03b2\u00a0decay) where the charge of the nucleus changes by two units. Double beta decay is difficult to study, as the process has an extremely long half-life. In nuclei for which both \u03b2\u00a0decay and \u03b2\u03b2\u00a0decay are possible, the rarer \u03b2\u03b2\u00a0decay process is effectively impossible to observe. However, in nuclei where \u03b2\u00a0decay is forbidden but \u03b2\u03b2\u00a0decay is allowed, the process can be seen and a half-life measured. Thus, \u03b2\u03b2\u00a0decay is usually studied only for beta stable nuclei. Like single beta decay, double beta decay does not change ; thus, at least one of the nuclides with some given has to be stable with regard to both single and double beta decay.\n\"Ordinary\" double beta decay results in the emission of two electrons and two antineutrinos. If neutrinos are Majorana particles (i.e., they are their own antiparticles), then a decay known as neutrinoless double beta decay will occur. Most neutrino physicists believe that neutrinoless double beta decay has never been observed."}
{"id": "4652", "revid": "41230220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4652", "title": "Blitzkrieg", "text": "Blitzkrieg (, from \"Blitz\" [\"lightning\"] + \"Krieg\" [\"war\"]) is a method of warfare where the attacker spearheads an offensive using a rapid overwhelming force concentration that may consist of armoured and motorised or mechanised infantry formations with close air support, with the intent to break through the opponent's line of defence by short, fast, and powerful attacks and then dislocates the defenders, using speed and surprise to encircle them with the help of air superiority. Through the employment of combined arms in manoeuvre warfare, blitzkrieg attempts to unbalance the enemy by making it difficult for it to respond to the continuously changing front, then defeat it in a decisive (battle of annihilation).\nDuring the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with systematic application of the traditional German tactic of (manoeuvre warfare), deep penetrations and the bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy enemy forces in a (cauldron battle). During the Invasion of Poland, Western journalists adopted the term \"blitzkrieg\" to describe this form of armoured warfare. The term had appeared in 1935, in a German military periodical (German Defence), in connection to quick or lightning warfare. German manoeuvre operations were successful in the campaigns of 1939\u20131941 and by 1940 the term \"blitzkrieg\" was extensively used in Western media. Blitzkrieg operations capitalized on surprise penetrations (e.g., the penetration of the Ardennes forest region), general enemy unreadiness and their inability to match the pace of the German attack. During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to re-form defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on.\nDespite being common in German and English-language journalism during World War II, the word was never used by the Wehrmacht as an official military term, except for propaganda. According to David Reynolds, \"Hitler himself called the term Blitzkrieg 'A completely idiotic word' (\"ein ganz bl\u00f6dsinniges Wort\")\". Some senior officers, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, even disputed the idea that it was a military concept. Kielmansegg asserted that what many regarded as blitzkrieg was nothing more than \"ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation\". Student described it as ideas that \"naturally emerged from the existing circumstances\" as a response to operational challenges. The Wehrmacht never officially adopted it as a concept or doctrine.\nIn 2005, the historian Karl-Heinz Frieser summarized blitzkrieg as the result of German commanders using the latest technology in the most beneficial way according to traditional military principles and employing \"the right units in the right place at the right time\". Modern historians now understand blitzkrieg as the combination of the traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century with the military technology of the interwar period. Modern historians use the term casually as a generic description for the style of manoeuvre warfare practised by Germany during the early part of World War II, rather than as an explanation. According to Frieser, in the context of the thinking of Heinz Guderian on mobile combined arms formations, blitzkrieg can be used as a synonym for modern maneuver warfare on the operational level.\nDefinition.\nCommon interpretation.\nThe traditional meaning of blitzkrieg is that of German tactical and operational methodology in the first half of the Second World War, that is often hailed as a new method of warfare. The word, meaning \"lightning war\" or \"lightning attack\" in its strategic sense describes a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it could fully mobilize. Tactically, blitzkrieg is a coordinated military effort by tanks, motorized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to defeat the opponent and break through its defences. \"Blitzkrieg\" as used by Germany had considerable psychological, or \"terror\" elements, such as the \"Jericho Trompete\", a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive-bomber, to affect the morale of enemy forces. The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940 and instead bombs sometimes had whistles attached. It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological warfare by using Fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operations.\nOrigin of the term.\nThe origin of the term \"blitzkrieg\" is obscure. It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German army or air force, and no \"coherent doctrine\" or \"unifying concept of blitzkrieg\" existed. The term seems rarely to have been used in the German military press before 1939 and recent research at the German \"Milit\u00e4rgeschichtliches Forschungsamt\" at Potsdam found it in only two military articles from the 1930s. Both used the term to mean a swift strategic knock-out, rather than a radical new military doctrine or approach to war. The first article (1935) deals primarily with supplies of food and materiel in wartime. The term \"blitzkrieg\" is used with reference to German efforts to win a quick victory in the First World War but is not associated with the use of armoured, mechanised or air forces. It argued that Germany must develop self-sufficiency in food, because it might again prove impossible to deal a swift knock-out to its enemies, leading to a long war. In the second article (1938), launching a swift strategic knock-out is described as an attractive idea for Germany but difficult to achieve on land under modern conditions (especially against systems of fortification like the Maginot Line), unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise could be achieved. The author vaguely suggests that a massive strategic air attack might hold out better prospects but the topic is not explored in detail. A third relatively early use of the term in German occurs in \"Die Deutsche Kriegsst\u00e4rke\" (German War Strength) by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish, Marxist, political economist and refugee from the Third Reich, published in 1938 in Paris and in London as \"Germany and a Lightning War\". Sternberg wrote that Germany was not prepared economically for a long war but might win a quick war (\"Blitzkrieg\"). He did not go into detail about tactics or suggest that the German armed forces had evolved a radically new operational method. His book offers scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won.\nIn English and other languages, the term had been used since the 1920s. The term was first used in the publications of Ferdinand Otto Miksche, first in the magazine \"Army Quarterly\" (according ), later as a book \"Blitzkrieg: The German Method 1939-1941\", which might be the first use of the term in military circles in connection to German tactics. The term was commonly used in the Canadian press beginning in the summer of 1939, with usage intensifying in the month before the war began. After the invasion of Poland, the British press commonly used the term to describe German successes in that campaign, something Harris called \"a piece of journalistic sensationalism \u2013 a buzz-word with which to label the spectacular early successes of the Germans in the Second World War\". It was later applied to the bombing of Britain, particularly London, hence \"The Blitz\". The German popular press followed suit nine months later, after the fall of France in 1940; hence although the word had been used in German, it was first popularized by British journalism. Heinz Guderian referred to it as a word coined by the Allies: \"as a result of the successes of our rapid campaigns our enemies\u00a0\u2026 coined the word \"Blitzkrieg\"\". After the German failure in the Soviet Union in 1941, use of the term began to be frowned upon in the Third Reich, and Hitler then denied ever using the term, saying in a speech in November 1941, \"I have never used the word \"Blitzkrieg\", because it is a very silly word\". In early January 1942, Hitler dismissed it as \"Italian phraseology\".\nMilitary evolution, 1919\u20131939.\nGermany.\nIn 1914, German strategic thinking derived from the writings of Carl von Clausewitz (1 June 1780 \u2013 16 November 1831), Helmuth von Moltke the Elder (26 October 1800 \u2013 24 April 1891) and Alfred von Schlieffen (28 February 1833 \u2013 4 January 1913), who advocated manoeuvre, mass and envelopment to create the conditions for a decisive battle (). During the war, officers such as Willy Rohr developed tactics to restore manoeuvre on the battlefield. Specialist light infantry (\"Stosstruppen\", \"storm troops\") were to exploit weak spots to make gaps for larger infantry units to advance with heavier weapons and exploit the success, leaving isolated strong points to troops following up. Infiltration tactics were combined with short hurricane artillery bombardments using massed artillery, devised by Colonel Georg Bruchm\u00fcller. Attacks relied on speed and surprise rather than on weight of numbers. These tactics met with great success in Operation Michael, the spring offensive of 1918 and restored temporarily the war of movement, once the Allied trench system had been overrun. The German armies pushed on towards Amiens and then Paris, coming within before supply deficiencies and Allied reinforcements halted the advance. \nHistorian James Corum criticised the German leadership for failing to understand the technical advances of the First World War, having conducted no studies of the machine gun prior to the war, and giving tank production the lowest priority during the war. Following Germany's defeat, the Treaty of Versailles limited the Reichswehr to a maximum of 100,000 men, making impossible the deployment of mass armies. The German General Staff was abolished by the treaty but continued covertly as the \"Truppenamt\" (Troop Office), disguised as an administrative body. Committees of veteran staff officers were formed within the \"Truppenamt\" to evaluate 57 issues of the war to revise German operational theories. By the time of the Second World War, their reports had led to doctrinal and training publications, including H. Dv. 487, \"F\u00fchrung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen\" (Command and Battle of the Combined Arms), known as das Fug (1921\u201323) and \"Truppenf\u00fchrung\" (1933\u201334), containing standard procedures for combined-arms warfare. The \"Reichswehr\" was influenced by its analysis of pre-war German military thought, in particular infiltration tactics, which at the end of the war had seen some breakthroughs on the Western Front and the manoeuvre warfare which dominated the Eastern Front.\nOn the Eastern Front, the war did not bog down into trench warfare; German and Russian armies fought a war of manoeuvre over thousands of miles, which gave the German leadership unique experience not available to the trench-bound western Allies. Studies of operations in the east led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat power than large, uncoordinated forces. After the war, the \"Reichswehr\" expanded and improved infiltration tactics. The commander in chief, Hans von Seeckt, argued that there had been an excessive focus on encirclement and emphasized speed instead. Seeckt inspired a revision of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (maneuver warfare) thinking and its associated \"Auftragstaktik\", in which the commander expressed his goals to subordinates and gave them discretion in how to achieve them; the governing principle was \"the higher the authority, the more general the orders were\", so it was the responsibility of the lower echelons to fill in the details. Implementation of higher orders remained within limits determined by the training doctrine of an elite officer-corps. Delegation of authority to local commanders increased the tempo of operations, which had great influence on the success of German armies in the early war period. Seeckt, who believed in the Prussian tradition of mobility, developed the German army into a mobile force, advocating technical advances that would lead to a qualitative improvement of its forces and better coordination between motorized infantry, tanks, and planes.\nBritain.\nThe British army took lessons from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918. To obtain the best co-operation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, rigid control and adherence to orders. Mechanization of the army was considered a means to avoid mass casualties and indecisive nature of offensives, as part of a combined-arms theory of war. The four editions of \"Field Service Regulations\" published after 1918 held that only combined-arms operations could create enough fire power to enable mobility on a battlefield. This theory of war also emphasized consolidation, recommending caution against overconfidence and ruthless exploitation.\nIn the Sinai and Palestine campaign, operations involved some aspects of what would later be called blitzkrieg. The decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed; success depended on attacking only in terrain favoring the movement of large formations around the battlefield and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack. General Edmund Allenby used infantry to attack the strong Ottoman front line in co-operation with supporting artillery, augmented by the guns of two destroyers. Through constant pressure by infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus (Battle of Megiddo).\nThe British methods induced \"strategic paralysis\" among the Ottomans and led to their rapid and complete collapse. In an advance of , captures were estimated to be \"at least prisoners and 260 guns.\" Liddell Hart considered that important aspects of the operation were the extent to which Ottoman commanders were denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority and air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, which paralyzed attempts to react to the rapidly deteriorating situation.\nFrance.\nNorman Stone detects early blitzkrieg operations in offensives by the French generals Charles Mangin and Marie-Eug\u00e8ne Debeney in 1918. However, French doctrine in the interwar years became defence-oriented. Colonel Charles de Gaulle advocated concentration of armour and aeroplanes. His opinions appeared in his book \"Vers l'Arm\u00e9e de m\u00e9tier\" (Towards the Professional Army, 1933). Like von Seeckt, de Gaulle concluded that France could no longer maintain the huge armies of conscripts and reservists which had fought World War I, and he sought to use tanks, mechanised forces and aircraft to allow a smaller number of highly trained soldiers to have greater impact in battle. His views little endeared him to the French high command, but are claimed by some to have influenced Heinz Guderian.\nRussia/USSR.\nIn 1916 General Alexei Brusilov had used surprise and infiltration tactics during the Brusilov Offensive. Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky (1893-1937), (1898-1976) and other members of the Red Army developed a concept of deep battle from the experience of the Polish\u2013Soviet War of 1919\u20131920. These concepts would guide Red Army doctrine throughout World War II. Realising the limitations of infantry and cavalry, Tukhachevsky advocated mechanised formations and the large-scale industrialisation they required. Robert Watt (2008) wrote that blitzkrieg has little in common with Soviet deep battle. In 2002 H. P. Willmott had noted that deep battle contained two important differences: it was a doctrine of total war (not of limited operations), and rejected decisive battle in favour of several large, simultaneous offensives.\nThe \"Reichswehr\" and the Red Army began a secret collaboration in the Soviet Union to evade the Treaty of Versailles occupational agent, the Inter-Allied Commission. In 1926 war-games and tests began at Kazan and Lipetsk in the RSFSR. The centres served to field-test aircraft and armoured vehicles up to the battalion level and housed aerial- and armoured-warfare schools, through which officers rotated.\nNazi Germany.\nAfter becoming Chancellor of Germany (head of government) in 1933, Adolf Hitler ignored the Versailles Treaty provisions. Within the Wehrmacht (established in 1935) the command for motorised armored forces was named the \"Panzerwaffe\" in 1936. The Luftwaffe (the German air force) was officially established in February 1935, and development began on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines. Hitler strongly supported this new strategy. He read Guderian's 1937 book \"Achtung \u2013 Panzer!\" and upon observing armoured field exercises at Kummersdorf he remarked, \"That is what I want \u2013 and that is what I will have.\"\nGuderian.\nGuderian summarised combined-arms tactics as the way to get the mobile and motorised armoured divisions to work together and support each other to achieve decisive success. In his 1950 book, \"Panzer Leader\", he wrote:\nGuderian believed that developments in technology were required to support the theory; especially, equipping armoured divisions\u2014tanks foremost\u2013with wireless communications. Guderian insisted in 1933 to the high command that every tank in the German armoured force must be equipped with a radio. At the start of World War II, only the German army was thus prepared with all tanks \"radio-equipped\". This proved critical in early tank battles where German tank commanders exploited the organizational advantage over the Allies that radio communication gave them. Later all Allied armies would copy this innovation. During the Polish campaign, the performance of armoured troops, under the influence of Guderian's ideas, won over a number of skeptics who had initially expressed doubt about armoured warfare, such as von Rundstedt and Rommel.\nRommel.\nAccording to David A.Grossman, by the 12th Battle of Isonzo (October\u2013November 1917), while conducting a light-infantry operation, Rommel had perfected his maneuver-warfare principles, which were the very same ones that were applied during the Blitzkrieg against France in 1940 (and repeated in the Coalition ground offensive against Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War). During the Battle of France and against his staff advisor's advice, Hitler ordered that everything should be completed in a few weeks; fortunately for the F\u00fchrer, Rommel and Guderian disobeyed the General Staff's orders (particularly General von Kleist) and forged ahead making quicker progress than anyone expected, and on the way, \"inventing the idea of Blitzkrieg\". It was Rommel who created the new archetype of Blitzkrieg, leading his division far ahead of flanking divisions. MacGregor and Williamson remark that Rommel's version of Blitzkrieg displayed a significantly better understanding of combined-arms warfare than that of Guderian. General Hoth submitted an official report in July 1940 which declared that Rommel had \"explored new paths in the command of Panzer divisions\".\nMethods of operations.\n\"Schwerpunkt\".\n\"Schwerpunktprinzip\" was a heuristic device (conceptual tool or thinking formula) used in the German army since the nineteenth century, to make decisions from tactics to strategy about priority. \"Schwerpunkt\" has been translated as \"centre of gravity\", \"crucial\", \"focal point\" and \"point of main effort\". None of these forms is sufficient to describe the universal importance of the term and the concept of \"Schwerpunktprinzip\". Every unit in the army, from the company to the supreme command, decided on a \"Schwerpunkt\" through \"schwerpunktbildung\", as did the support services, which meant that commanders always knew what was most important and why. The German army was trained to support the \"Schwerpunkt\", even when risks had to be taken elsewhere to support the point of main effort. Through \"Schwerpunktbildung\", the German army could achieve superiority at the \"Schwerpunkt\", whether attacking or defending, to turn local success at the \"Schwerpunkt\" into the progressive disorganisation of the opposing force, creating more opportunities to exploit this advantage, even if numerically and strategically inferior in general. In the 1930s, Guderian summarised this as \"Klotzen, nicht kleckern!\" (\"Kick, don't spatter them!\").\nPursuit.\nHaving achieved a breakthrough of the enemy's line, units comprising the \"Schwerpunkt\" were not supposed to become decisively engaged with enemy front line units to the right and left of the breakthrough area. Units pouring through the hole were to drive upon set objectives behind the enemy front line. In World War II, German Panzer forces used motorised mobility to paralyse the opponent's ability to react. Fast-moving mobile forces seized the initiative, exploited weaknesses and acted before opposing forces could respond. Central to this was the decision cycle (tempo). Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could act quicker than the forces opposing them. Directive control was a fast and flexible method of command. Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior's intent and the role which his unit was to fill in this concept. The method of execution was then a matter for the discretion of the subordinate commander. Staff burden was reduced at the top and spread among tiers of command with knowledge about their situation. Delegation and the encouragement of initiative aided implementation, important decisions could be taken quickly and communicated verbally or with brief written orders.\nMopping-up.\nThe last part of an offensive operation was the destruction of un-subdued pockets of resistance, which had been enveloped earlier and by-passed by the fast-moving armoured and motorised spearheads. The \"Kesselschlacht\" 'cauldron battle' was a concentric attack on such pockets. It was here that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the mass capture of prisoners and weapons. During Operation Barbarossa, huge encirclements in 1941 produced nearly 3.5 million Soviet prisoners, along with masses of equipment.\nAir power.\nClose air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber. They would support the focal point of attack from the air. German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German \"Luftwaffe\" was able to control the air war in early campaigns in Western and Central Europe, and the Soviet Union. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine, other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy. It was flexible and it was able to carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing. Flexibility was the \"Luftwaffe\"s strength in 1939\u20131941. Paradoxically, from that period onward it became its weakness. While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the \"Luftwaffe\" deployed its resources in a more general, operational way. It switched from air superiority missions, to medium-range interdiction, to strategic strikes, to close support duties depending on the need of the ground forces. In fact, far from it being a specialist panzer spearhead arm, less than 15 percent of the Luftwaffe was intended for close support of the army in 1939.\nLimitations and countermeasures.\nEnvironment.\nThe concepts associated with the term \"blitzkrieg\"\u2014deep penetrations by armour, large encirclements, and combined arms attacks\u2014were largely dependent upon terrain and weather conditions. Where the ability for rapid movement across \"tank country\" was not possible, armoured penetrations often were avoided or resulted in failure. Terrain would ideally be flat, firm, unobstructed by natural barriers or fortifications, and interspersed with roads and railways. If it were instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armour would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed. Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow. Operation Barbarossa helped confirm that armour effectiveness and the requisite aerial support were dependent on weather and terrain. It should however be noted that the disadvantages of terrain could be nullified if surprise was achieved over the enemy by an attack through areas considered natural obstacles, as occurred during the Battle of France when the German blitzkrieg-style attack went through the Ardennes. Since the French thought the Ardennes unsuitable for massive troop movement, particularly for tanks, they were left with only light defences which were quickly overrun by the \"Wehrmacht\". The Germans quickly advanced through the forest, knocking down the trees the French thought would impede this tactic.\nAir superiority.\nThe influence of air forces over forces on the ground changed significantly over the course of the Second World War. Early German successes were conducted when Allied aircraft could not make a significant impact on the battlefield. In May 1940, there was near parity in numbers of aircraft between the \"Luftwaffe\" and the Allies, but the \"Luftwaffe\" had been developed to support Germany's ground forces, had liaison officers with the mobile formations, and operated a higher number of sorties per aircraft. In addition, German air parity or superiority allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, their unhindered assembly into concentrated attack formations, aerial reconnaissance, aerial resupply of fast moving formations and close air support at the point of attack. The Allied air forces had no close air support aircraft, training or doctrine. The Allies flew 434 French and 160 British sorties a day but methods of attacking ground targets had yet to be developed; therefore Allied aircraft caused negligible damage. Against these 600 sorties the \"Luftwaffe\" on average flew 1,500 sorties a day. On 13 May, \"Fliegerkorps\" VIII flew 1,000 sorties in support of the crossing of the Meuse. The following day the Allies made repeated attempts to destroy the German pontoon bridges, but German fighter aircraft, ground fire and \"Luftwaffe\" flak batteries with the panzer forces destroyed 56 percent of the attacking Allied aircraft while the bridges remained intact.\nAllied air superiority became a significant hindrance to German operations during the later years of the war. By June 1944 the Western Allies had complete control of the air over the battlefield and their fighter-bomber aircraft were very effective at attacking ground forces. On D-Day the Allies flew 14,500 sorties over the battlefield area alone, not including sorties flown over north-western Europe. Against this on 6 June the \"Luftwaffe\" flew some 300 sorties. Though German fighter presence over Normandy increased over the next days and weeks, it never approached the numbers the Allies commanded. Fighter-bomber attacks on German formations made movement during daylight almost impossible. Subsequently, shortages soon developed in food, fuel and ammunition, severely hampering the German defenders. German vehicle crews and even flak units experienced great difficulty moving during daylight. Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimize interference by Allied aircraft. Under these conditions it was difficult for German commanders to employ the \"armoured idea\", if at all.\nCounter-tactics.\nBlitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and that does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area. This is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funnelling forces into the spearhead, or lacks the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack. If the defender can hold the shoulders of the breach they will have the opportunity to counter-attack into the flank of the attacker, potentially cutting off the van as happened to Kampfgruppe Peiper in the Ardennes.\nDuring the Battle of France in 1940, the 4th Armoured Division (Major-General Charles de Gaulle) and elements of the 1st Army Tank Brigade (British Expeditionary Force) made probing attacks on the German flank, pushing into the rear of the advancing armoured columns at times. This may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance. Those attacks combined with Maxime Weygand's Hedgehog tactic would become the major basis for responding to blitzkrieg attacks in the future: deployment in depth, permitting enemy or \"shoulders\" of a penetration was essential to channelling the enemy attack, and artillery, properly employed at the shoulders, could take a heavy toll of attackers. While Allied forces in 1940 lacked the experience to successfully develop these strategies, resulting in France's capitulation with heavy losses, they characterised later Allied operations. At the Battle of Kursk the Red Army employed a combination of defence in great depth, extensive minefields, and tenacious defence of breakthrough shoulders. In this way they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced. The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944, Operation Bagration, which resulted in the destruction of Army Group Center. German attempts to weather the storm and fight out of encirclements failed due to the Russian ability to continue to feed armoured units into the attack, maintaining the mobility and strength of the offensive, arriving in force deep in the rear areas, faster than the Germans could regroup.\nLogistics.\nAlthough effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years. Strategies based on manoeuvre have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines, and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front (as opposed to, for example, the Dutch who had no territory to sacrifice). Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany; indeed, late in the war many panzer \"divisions\" had no more than a few dozen tanks. As the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade. Although production of \"Luftwaffe\" fighter aircraft continued, they would be unable to fly for lack of fuel. What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then they were not able to operate normally. Of those Tiger tanks lost against the United States Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel.\nMilitary operations.\nSpanish Civil War.\nGerman volunteers first used armour in live field conditions during the Spanish Civil War of 1936. Armour commitment consisted of Panzer Battalion 88, a force built around three companies of Panzer I tanks that functioned as a training cadre for Nationalists. The Luftwaffe deployed squadrons of fighters, dive bombers and transport aircraft as the \"Condor Legion\". Guderian said that the tank deployment was \"on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made.\" The true test of his \"armoured idea\" would have to wait for the Second World War. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" also provided volunteers to Spain to test both tactics and aircraft in combat, including the first combat use of the \"Stuka\".\nDuring the war, the \"Condor Legion\" undertook the bombing of Guernica which had a tremendous psychological effect on the populations of Europe. The results were exaggerated, and the Western Allies concluded that the \"city-busting\" techniques were now a part of the German way in war. The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges. But lacking the ability to hit them with accuracy (only three or four Ju 87s saw action in Spain), a method of carpet bombing was chosen resulting in heavy civilian casualties.\nPoland, 1939.\nDespite the term \"blitzkrieg\" being coined by journalists during the Invasion of Poland of 1939, historians Matthew Cooper and J. P. Harris have written that German operations during it were consistent with traditional methods. The Wehrmacht strategy was more in line with \"Vernichtungsgedanken\" a focus on envelopment to create pockets in broad-front annihilation. Panzer forces were dispersed among the three German concentrations with little emphasis on independent use, being used to create or destroy close pockets of Polish forces and seize operational-depth terrain in support of the largely un-motorized infantry which followed.\nWhile early German tanks, Stuka dive-bombers and concentrated forces were used in the Polish campaign, the majority of the battle was conventional infantry and artillery warfare and most Luftwaffe action was independent of the ground campaign. Matthew Cooper wrote that\nJohn Ellis wrote that \"\u2026there is considerable justice in Matthew Cooper's assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of \"strategic\" mission that was to characterize authentic armoured blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies.\" Steven Zaloga wrote, \"Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzer and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units. Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht.\"\nLow Countries and France, 1940.\nThe German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (\"Fall Gelb\") and Operation Red (\"Fall Rot\"). Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armoured corps and paratroopers. Most of the German armoured forces were placed in Panzer Group von Kleist, which attacked through the Ardennes, a lightly defended sector that the French planned to reinforce if need be, before the Germans could bring up heavy and siege artillery. There was no time for such a reinforcement to be sent, for the Germans did not wait for siege artillery but reached the Meuse and achieved a breakthrough at the Battle of Sedan in three days.\nThe group raced to the English Channel, reaching the coast at Abbeville and cut off the BEF, the Belgian Army and some of the best-equipped divisions of the French Army in northern France. Armoured and motorised units under Guderian, Rommel and others, advanced far beyond the marching and horse-drawn infantry divisions and far in excess of that with which Hitler and the German high command expected or wished. When the Allies counter-attacked at Arras using the heavily armoured British Matilda I and Matilda II tanks, a brief panic was created in the German High Command. The armoured and motorised forces were halted by Hitler outside the port of Dunkirk, which was being used to evacuate the Allied forces. Hermann G\u00f6ring promised that the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies but aerial operations failed to prevent the evacuation of the majority of the Allied troops. In Operation Dynamo some French and British troops escaped.\nCase Yellow surprised everyone, overcoming the Allies' 4,000 armoured vehicles, many of which were better than German equivalents in armour and gun-power. The French and British frequently used their tanks in the dispersed role of infantry support rather than concentrating force at the point of attack, to create overwhelming firepower.\nThe French armies were much reduced in strength and the confidence of their commanders shaken. With much of their own armour and heavy equipment lost in Northern France, they lacked the means to fight a mobile war. The Germans followed their initial success with Operation Red, a triple-pronged offensive. The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon and the XIX Panzer Corps encircled the Maginot Line. The French were hard pressed to organise any sort of counter-attack and were continually ordered to form new defensive lines and found that German forces had already by-passed them and moved on. An armoured counter-attack organised by Colonel de Gaulle could not be sustained and he had to retreat.\nPrior to the German offensive in May, Winston Churchill had said \"Thank God for the French Army\". That same French army collapsed after barely two months of fighting. This was in shocking contrast to the four years of trench warfare they had engaged in during the First World War. The French president of the Ministerial Council, Reynaud, attributed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:\nThe Germans had not used paratroop attacks in France and only made one big drop in the Netherlands, to capture three bridges; some small glider-landings were conducted in Belgium to take bottle-necks on routes of advance before the arrival of the main force (the most renowned being the landing on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium).\nEastern Front, 1941\u201344.\nUse of armoured forces was crucial for both sides on the Eastern Front. Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, involved a number of breakthroughs and encirclements by motorised forces. Its goal according to F\u00fchrer Directive 21 (18 December 1940) was \"to destroy the Russian forces deployed in the West and to prevent their escape into the wide-open spaces of Russia.\" The Red Army was to be destroyed west of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers, which were about east of the Soviet border, to be followed by a mopping-up operation. The surprise attack resulted in the near annihilation of the Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily (VVS, Soviet Air Force) by simultaneous attacks on airfields, allowing the Luftwaffe to achieve total air supremacy over all the battlefields within the first week. On the ground, four German panzer groups outflanked and encircled disorganised Red Army units, while the marching infantry completed the encirclements and defeated the trapped forces. In late July, after 2nd Panzer Group (commanded by Guderian) captured the watersheds of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers near Smolensk, the panzers had to defend the encirclement, because the marching infantry divisions were still hundreds of kilometres to the west.\nThe Germans conquered large areas of the Soviet Union but their failure to destroy the Red Army before the winter of 1941 was a strategic failure that made German tactical superiority and territorial gains irrelevant. The Red Army had survived enormous losses and regrouped with new formations far to the rear of the front line. During the Battle of Moscow, the Red Army defeated the German Army Group Center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative.\nIn the summer of 1942, Germany launched another offensive in the southern USSR against Stalingrad and the Caucasus, the Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter. German gains were ultimately limited by Hitler diverting forces from the attack on Stalingrad and driving towards the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously. The \"Wehrmacht\" became overstretched, although winning operationally, it could not inflict a decisive defeat as the durability of the Soviet Union's manpower, resources, industrial base and aid from the Western Allies began to take effect.\nIn July 1943 the \"Wehrmacht\" conducted Operation (Citadel) against a salient at Kursk that was heavily defended by Soviet troops. Soviet defensive tactics were by now hugely improved, particularly in the use of artillery and air support. By April 1943, the Stavka had learned of German intentions through intelligence supplied by front line reconnaissance and Ultra intercepts. In the following months, the Red Army constructed deep defensive belts along the paths of the planned German attack. The Soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of German plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations, and the German commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced.\nThe Germans did not achieve surprise and were not able to outflank or break through into enemy rear areas during the operation. Several historians assert that Operation Citadel was planned and intended to be a blitzkrieg operation. Many of the German participants who wrote about the operation after the war, including Manstein, make no mention of blitzkrieg in their accounts. In 2000, Niklas Zetterling and Anders Frankson characterised only the southern pincer of the German offensive as a \"classical blitzkrieg attack\". Pier Battistelli wrote that the operational planning marked a change in German offensive thinking away from blitzkrieg and that more priority was given to brute force and fire power than to speed and manoeuvre.\nIn 1995, David Glantz stated that for the first time, blitzkrieg was defeated in summer and the opposing Soviet forces were able to mount a successful counter-offensive. The Battle of Kursk ended with two Soviet counter-offensives and the revival of deep operations. In the summer of 1944, the Red Army destroyed Army Group Centre in Operation Bagration, using combined-arms tactics for armour, infantry and air power in a coordinated strategic assault, known as deep operations, which led to an advance of in six weeks.\nWestern Front, 1944\u201345.\nAllied armies began using combined arms formations and deep penetration strategies that Germany had used in the opening years of the war. Many Allied operations in the Western Desert and on the Eastern Front, relied on firepower to establish breakthroughs by fast-moving armoured units. These artillery-based tactics were also decisive in Western Front operations after Operation Overlord and the British Commonwealth and American armies developed flexible and powerful systems for using artillery support. What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of rocket launchers, guns and mortars. The Germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations their enemies were capable of by 1944.\nAfter the Allied landings at Normandy, the Germans began a counter-offensive to overwhelm the landing force with armoured attacks but these failed for lack of co-ordination and Allied superiority in anti-tank defence and in the air. The most notable attempt to use deep penetration operations in Normandy was Operation Luttich at Mortain, which only hastened the Falaise Pocket and the destruction of German forces in Normandy. The Mortain counter-attack was defeated by the US 12th Army Group with little effect on its own offensive operations.\nThe last German offensive on the Western front, the Battle of the Bulge (Operation \"Wacht am Rhein\"), was an offensive launched towards the port of Antwerp in December 1944. Launched in poor weather against a thinly held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air power was grounded by cloud cover. Determined defence by US troops in places throughout the Ardennes, the lack of good roads and German supply shortages caused delays. Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft returned to the battlefield. Allied counter-attacks soon forced back the Germans, who abandoned much equipment for lack of fuel.\nPost-war controversy.\nBlitzkrieg had been called a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) but many writers and historians have concluded that the Germans did not invent a new form of warfare but applied new technologies to traditional ideas of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (manoeuvre warfare) to achieve decisive victory.\nStrategy.\nIn 1965, Captain Robert O'Neill, Professor of the History of War at the University of Oxford produced an example of the popular view. In \"Doctrine and Training in the German Army 1919\u20131939\", O'Neill wrote\nOther historians wrote that blitzkrieg was an operational doctrine of the German armed forces and a strategic concept on which the leadership of the \"Third Reich\" based its strategic and economic planning. Military planners and bureaucrats in the war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term \"blitzkrieg\" in official documents. That the German army had a \"blitzkrieg doctrine\" was rejected in the late 1970s by Matthew Cooper. The concept of a blitzkrieg \"Luftwaffe\" was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s. That the \"Third Reich\" went to war on the basis of \"blitzkrieg economics\" was criticised by Richard Overy in the 1980s and George Raudzens described the contradictory senses in which historians have used the word. The notion of a German blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survives in popular history and many historians still support the thesis.\nFrieser wrote that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German army concluded that decisive battles were no longer possible in the changed conditions of the twentieth century. Frieser wrote that the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), which was created in 1938 had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long war of exhaustion (\"ermattungskrieg\"). It was only after the improvised plan for the Battle of France in 1940 was unexpectedly successful, that the German General Staff came to believe that \"vernichtungskrieg\" was still feasible. German thinking reverted to the possibility of a quick and decisive war for the Balkan campaign and Operation Barbarossa.\nDoctrine.\nMost academic historians regard the notion of blitzkrieg as military doctrine to be a myth. Shimon Naveh wrote \"The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations\". Naveh described it as an \"ad hoc solution\" to operational dangers, thrown together at the last moment. Overy disagreed with the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war, because the once popular belief that the Nazi state organised their economy to carry out its grand strategy in short campaigns was false. Hitler had intended for a rapid unlimited war to occur much later than 1939, but the \"Third Reich's\" aggressive foreign policy forced the Nazi state into war before it was ready. Hitler and the \"Wehrmacht's\" planning in the 1930s did not reflect a blitzkrieg method but the opposite. John Harris wrote that the Wehrmacht never used the word, and it did not appear in German army or air force field manuals; the word was coined in September 1939, by a \"Times\" newspaper reporter. Harris also found no evidence that German military thinking developed a blitzkrieg mentality. Karl-Heinz Frieser and Adam Tooze reached similar conclusions to Overy and Naveh, that the notions of blitzkrieg-economy and strategy were myths. Frieser wrote that surviving German economists and General Staff officers denied that Germany went to war with a blitzkrieg strategy. Robert M. Citino argues:\nHistorian Victor Davis Hanson states that \"Blitzkrieg\" \"played on the myth of German technological superiority and industrial dominance,\" adding that German successes, particularly that of its Panzer divisions were \"instead predicated on the poor preparation and morale of Germany's enemies.\" Hanson also reports that at a Munich public address in November 1941, Hitler had \"disowned\" the concept of \"Blitzkrieg\" by calling it an \"idiotic word.\" Further, successful \"Blitzkrieg\" operations were predicated on superior numbers, air-support, and were only possible for short periods of time without sufficient supply lines. For all intents and purposes, \"Blitzkrieg\" ended at the Eastern Front once the German forces gave up Stalingrad, after they faced hundreds of new T-34 tanks, when the Luftwaffe became unable to assure air dominance, and following the stalemate at Kursk\u2014to this end, Hanson concludes that German military success was not accompanied by the adequate provisioning of its troops with food and materiel far from the source of supply, which contributed to its ultimate failures. Despite its later disappointments as German troops extended their lines at too great a distance, the very specter or armored \"Blitzkrieg\" forces initially proved victorious against Polish, Dutch, Belgian, and French armies early in the war.\nEconomics.\nIn the 1960s, Alan Milward developed a theory of blitzkrieg economics, that Germany could not fight a long war and chose to avoid comprehensive rearmament and armed in breadth, to win quick victories. Milward described an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy. The purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the German people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities and avoid the economic hardships of the First World War.\nOvery wrote that blitzkrieg as a \"coherent military and economic concept has proven a difficult strategy to defend in light of the evidence\". Milward's theory was contrary to Hitler's and German planners' intentions. The Germans, aware of the errors of the First World War, rejected the concept of organising its economy to fight only a short war. Therefore, focus was given to the development of armament in depth for a long war, instead of armament in breadth for a short war. Hitler claimed that relying on surprise alone was \"criminal\" and that \"we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack\". During the winter of 1939\u201340, Hitler demobilised many troops from the army to return as skilled workers to factories because the war would be decided by production, not a quick \"Panzer operation\".\nIn the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited. In November 1937 Hitler had indicated that most of the armament projects would be completed by 1943\u201345. The rearmament of the \"Kriegsmarine\" was to have been completed in 1949 and the \"Luftwaffe\" rearmament program was to have matured in 1942, with a force capable of strategic bombing with heavy bombers. The construction and training of motorised forces and a full mobilisation of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944 respectively. Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced Germany into war before rearmament was complete.\nAfter the war, Albert Speer claimed that the German economy achieved greater armaments output, not because of diversions of capacity from civilian to military industry but through streamlining of the economy. Richard Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939. Between 1937 and 1939, 70 percent of investment capital went into the rubber, synthetic fuel, aircraft and shipbuilding industries. Hermann G\u00f6ring had consistently stated that the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war. Hitler's correspondence with his economists also reveals that his intent was to wage war in 1943\u20131945, when the resources of central Europe had been absorbed into the \"Third Reich\".\nLiving standards were not high in the late 1930s. Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938. The demands of the war economy reduced the amount of spending in non-military sectors to satisfy the demand for the armed forces. On 9 September, G\u00f6ring as Head of the \"Reich Defence Council\", called for complete \"employment\" of living and fighting power of the national economy for the duration of the war. Overy presents this as evidence that a \"blitzkrieg economy\" did not exist.\nAdam Tooze wrote that the German economy was being prepared for a long war. The expenditure for this war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain. The German leadership were concerned less with how to balance the civilian economy and the needs of civilian consumption but to figure out how to best prepare the economy for total war. Once war had begun, Hitler urged his economic experts to abandon caution and expend all available resources on the war effort but the expansion plans only gradually gained momentum in 1941. Tooze wrote that the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy.\n\"Heer\".\nFrieser wrote that the () was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war. A blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanised army. In 1939\u201340, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old and 50 percent of the soldiers had only a few weeks' training. The German army, contrary to the blitzkrieg legend, was not fully motorised and had only 120,000 vehicles, compared to the 300,000 of the French Army. The British also had an \"enviable\" contingent of motorised forces. Thus, \"the image of the German 'Blitzkrieg' army is a figment of propaganda imagination\". During the First World War the German army used 1.4 million horses for transport and in the Second World War used 2.7 million horses; only ten percent of the army was motorised in 1940.\nHalf of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready but less well-equipped than the British and French or the Imperial German Army of 1914. In the spring of 1940, the German army was semi-modern, in which a small number of well-equipped and \"elite\" divisions were offset by many second and third rate divisions\". In 2003, John Mosier wrote that while the French soldiers in 1940 were better trained than German soldiers, as were the Americans later and that the German army was the least mechanised of the major armies, its leadership cadres were larger and better and that the high standard of leadership was the main reason for the successes of the German army in World War II, as it had been in World War I.\n\"Luftwaffe\".\nJames Corum wrote that it was a myth that the \"Luftwaffe\" had a doctrine of terror bombing, in which civilians were attacked to break the will or aid the collapse of an enemy, by the \"Luftwaffe\" in \"Blitzkrieg\" operations. After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and the Rotterdam Blitz in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of \"Luftwaffe\" doctrine. During the interwar period the \"Luftwaffe\" leadership rejected the concept of terror bombing in favour of battlefield support and interdiction operations.\nCorum continues: General Walther Wever compiled a doctrine known as \"The Conduct of the Aerial War\". This document, which the \"Luftwaffe\" adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet's theory of terror bombing. Terror bombing was deemed to be \"counter-productive\", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the \"Luftwaffe's\" main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks.\nJ. P. Harris wrote that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed (as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States) that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that\nThe Luftwaffe did end up with an air force consisting mainly of relatively short-range aircraft, but this does not prove that the German air force was solely interested in 'tactical' bombing. It happened because the German aircraft industry lacked the experience to build a long-range bomber fleet quickly, and because Hitler was insistent on the very rapid creation of a numerically large force. It is also significant that Germany's position in the centre of Europe to a large extent obviated the need to make a clear distinction between bombers suitable only for 'tactical' and those necessary for strategic purposes in the early stages of a likely future war.\nFuller and Liddell Hart.\nBritish theorists John Frederick Charles Fuller and Captain Basil Henry Liddell Hart have often been associated with the development of blitzkrieg, though this is a matter of controversy. In recent years historians have uncovered that Liddell Hart distorted and falsified facts to make it appear as if his ideas were adopted. After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions, after the event, claiming that the mobile tank warfare practised by the \"Wehrmacht\" was a result of his influence. By manipulation and contrivance, Liddell Hart distorted the actual circumstances of the blitzkrieg formation, and he obscured its origins. Through his indoctrinated idealisation of an ostentatious concept, he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg. By imposing, retrospectively, his own perceptions of mobile warfare upon the shallow concept of blitzkrieg, he \"created a theoretical imbroglio that has taken 40 years to unravel.\" Blitzkrieg was not an official doctrine and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion that it did not exist as such.\nThe early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian. The main evidence of Liddell Hart's deceit and \"tendentious\" report of history can be found in his letters to Erich von Manstein, Heinz Guderian and the relatives and associates of Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart, in letters to Guderian, \"imposed his own fabricated version of blitzkrieg on the latter and compelled him to proclaim it as original formula\". Kenneth Macksey found Liddell Hart's original letters to Guderian in the General's papers, requesting that Guderian give him credit for \"impressing him\" with his ideas of armoured warfare. When Liddell Hart was questioned about this in 1968 and the discrepancy between the English and German editions of Guderian's memoirs, \"he gave a conveniently unhelpful though strictly truthful reply. ('There is nothing about the matter in my file of correspondence with Guderian himself except...that I thanked him...for what he said in that additional paragraph'.)\".\nDuring World War I, Fuller had been a staff officer attached to the new tank corps. He developed Plan 1919 for massive, independent tank operations, which he claimed were subsequently studied by the German military. It is variously argued that Fuller's wartime plans and post-war writings were an inspiration or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention. The German view of themselves as the losers of the war, may be linked to the senior and experienced officers' undertaking a thorough review, studying and rewriting of all their Army doctrine and training manuals.\nFuller and Liddell Hart were \"outsiders\": Liddell Hart was unable to serve as a soldier after 1916 after being gassed on the Somme and Fuller's abrasive personality resulted in his premature retirement in 1933. Their views had limited impact in the British army; the War Office permitted the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, lorried infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorised engineers but the force was disbanded in 1928 on the grounds that it had served its purpose. A new experimental brigade was intended for the next year and became a permanent formation in 1933, during the cuts of the financial years.\nContinuity.\nIt has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new; the Germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s. Rather the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German wars of unification. The first European general to introduce rapid movement, concentrated power and integrated military effort was Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years' War. The appearance of the aircraft and tank in the First World War, called an RMA, offered the German military a chance to get back to the traditional war of movement as practised by Moltke the Elder. The so-called \"blitzkrieg campaigns\" of 1939 \u2013 circa 1942, were well within that operational context.\nAt the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war. The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century. J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short, decisive campaigns \u2013 but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions. The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second, was partly the employment of a relatively small number of mechanised divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force.\nGuderian.\nHeinz Guderian is widely regarded as being highly influential in developing the military methods of warfare used by Germany's tank men at the start of the Second World War. This style of warfare brought manoeuvre back to the fore, and placed an emphasis on the offensive. This style, along with the shockingly rapid collapse in the armies that opposed it, came to be branded as blitzkrieg warfare.\nFollowing Germany's military reforms of the 1920s, Heinz Guderian emerged as a strong proponent of mechanised forces. Within the Inspectorate of Transport Troops, Guderian and colleagues performed theoretical and field exercise work. Guderian met with opposition from some in the General Staff, who were distrustful of the new weapons and who continued to view the infantry as the primary weapon of the army. Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (1935\u201338), whom he alleged was sceptical that armoured forces could be decisive. This claim has been disputed by later historians. James Corum wrote:\nBy Guderian's account he single-handedly created the German tactical and operational methodology. Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote a number of articles concerning military movement. As the ideas of making use of the combustible engine in a protected encasement to bring mobility back to warfare developed in the German army, Guderian was a leading proponent of the formations that would be used for this purpose. He was later asked to write an explanatory book, which was titled \"Achtung Panzer!\" (1937). In it he explained the theories of the tank men and defended them.\nGuderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war. \"If the tanks succeed, then victory follows\", he wrote. In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote \"until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanks\u2014properly employed, needless to say\u2014are today the best means available for land attack.\" Addressing the faster rate at which defenders could reinforce an area than attackers could penetrate it during the First World War, Guderian wrote that \"since reserve forces will now be motorized, the building up of new defensive fronts is easier than it used to be; the chances of an offensive based on the timetable of artillery and infantry co-operation are, as a result, even slighter today than they were in the last war.\" He continued, \"We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, and\u2014what is perhaps even more important\u2014that we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made.\" Guderian additionally required that tactical radios be widely used to facilitate coordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.\nGuderian's leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalised by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s. Guderian's book incorporated the work of theorists such as , whose book, \"The Tank War\" (\"Der Kampfwagenkrieg\") (1934) gained a wide audience in the German army. Another German theorist, Ernst Volckheim, wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics and was influential to German thinking on the use of armoured formations but his work was not acknowledged in Guderian's writings."}
{"id": "4653", "revid": "1012979689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4653", "title": "The Beano", "text": "The Beano is the longest running British children's comic magazine, published by DC Thomson in Dundee, Scotland. The comic first appeared on 30 July 1938, and was published weekly. In September 2009, \"The Beano\"'s 3,500th issue was published. One of the best selling comics in the UK, along with \"The Dandy\", the weekly circulation of \"The Beano\" in April 1950 was 1,974,072. \"The Beano\" is currently edited by John Anderson. Each issue is published on a Wednesday, with the issue date being that of the following Saturday. \"The Beano\" reached its 4,000th issue on 28 August 2019.\nIts characters include \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"The Bash Street Kids\", \"The Numskulls\", \"Roger the Dodger\", \"Billy Whizz\" and \"Tricky Dicky.\" Earlier characters who have been phased out include \"Ball Boy,\" \"Les Pretend,\" \"Ivy the Terrible\", \"The Three Bears\" and \"Pansy Potter\". Some old characters, like \"Biffo the Bear\", \"Lord Snooty\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"Little Plum\", have more recently made a return as \"funsize\" quarter-page strips.\nThe style of \"Beano\" humour has shifted noticeably over the years, though the longstanding tradition of anarchic humour has remained. Historically, many protagonists were characterised by their immoral behaviour, e.g. pranking (\"Dennis the Menace\"), dishonesty (\"Roger the Dodger\") and even robbery (\"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"The Three Bears\"). Although the readers' sympathies are assumed to be with the miscreants, the latter are very often shown punished for their actions. Recent years have seen a rise in humour involving gross bodily functions, especially flatulence (which would have been taboo in children's comics prior to the 1990s), while depictions of corporal punishment have declined. For example, the literal slipper \u2013 the most common form of chastisement for characters such as Dennis, Minnie the Minx and Roger the Dodger \u2013 has become the name of the local chief of police (Sergeant Slipper).\nHistory.\nFounding, expansion.\nIn 1921, D. C. Thomson had first entered the field of boys' story papers with \"Adventure\". The success of this paper led to five further publications, \"The Rover\" and \"The Wizard\" in 1922, \"The Vanguard\" in 1924, \"The Skipper\" in 1930 and \"The Hotspur\" in 1933. Although \"The Vanguard\" folded in 1926, the others were a great triumph and became known as \"The Big Five\"; they ended Amalgamated Press's near-monopoly of the British comic industry.\nAnother success was the \"Fun Section\" of D. C. Thomson's Scottish weekly newspaper \"The Sunday Post\", which included the two strips \"Oor Wullie\" and \"The Broons\" by lead artist Dudley Watkins, as well as other funnies and various puzzles and adventure stories. This gave R. D. Low, the head of children's publications at D. C. Thomson at the time, the idea to create another Big Five, this time of comics intended for both boys and girls and consisting mainly of 'funnies' and more lighthearted adventure and text stories. With the creation of \"The Dandy\" in 1937, he placed an advertisement in \"The Daily Telegraph\" to find new artists to create weekly comic strips for his second book, and Reg Carter (who had originally published Mickey Mouse comics throughout the 1930s) responded in January 1938 with a few ideas and sketches. Carter and Low's eventual idea would be an ostrich that misplaced his eggs, which would later become Big Eggo, the first cover star of the eventually-named \"The Beano\" on 26 July 1938; the comic takes its name from the English word \"beano\", a short form of bean-feast, a term for a festive meal, or loosely \"a good time\". The third paper, \"The Magic Comic\", aimed at a slightly younger audience, followed in July 1939, but ceased publication in early 1941, due to paper rationing. Wartime shortages also prevented the New Big Five project from being completed.\nThe first edition of \"The Beano\" was dated 30 July 1938, and sold at two pence. It was full of comic strips (such as Lord Snooty, Wee Peem, Dead-Eyed Dick, Tin-Can Tommy) and prose stories (Ping the Elastic Man, My Dog Sandy, The Wishing Tree, etc.) and was an instant success, selling 443,000 copies that week. A facsimile of the first issue's cover was printed on the back of issue No. 2,000. Before Law's \"new big five\" plan, comic strips were printed in newspapers and/or a tabloid format, but the styles \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\" compacted their stories as well as extended them to fit 28 pages, despite selling at the same price as the traditionally-styled Amalgamated Press comics (\"Comic Cuts\" and \"Illustrated Chips\"), and also began the boys' adventure newspaper books genre decline. Issue 272 (December 1945) was the first issue to sell over a million copies.\nDuring the Second World War, \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\" were published on alternating weeks because of paper and ink rationing. D. C. Thomson's other publications also suffered, with the \"Oor Wullie\" and \"The Broons\" annuals falling victim to paper and ink shortages. Paper and ink supplies were fully restored shortly after the end of hostilities and weekly publication of \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\" resumed in 1949.\nThe 3,000th issue of \"The Beano\" was published in January 2000. \"The Beano\" is now the longest-running weekly comic, since \"The Dandy\" became a fortnightly comic in 2007, and later stopped publishing in 2013.\n\"The Beano\"'s weekly circulation in April 1950 was 1,974,072; it currently sells slightly over 31,000 copies per week.\nMerchandising.\nMany issues included a free gift inside, such as sweets, water pistols, whoopee masks, cardboard pistols, glove puppets, and other toys. \"The Beano\" celebrated its 50th anniversary with a free poster that had a timeline of the comic's history on the back. Originally, free gifts would be attached inside the cover or strategically on the front so that it could distract the buyer from other comics next to \"The Beano\" on the shelves, hopefully excited for the next issue after reading it and eating/playing with the toys. Said gifts would not be a weekly promise, especially during the Christmas period when families' money would be saved for food and presents.\nThe Dennis the Menace Fan Club launched on June 1976 in the strip's 25th year. Readers would send in for a 30p membership card, two badges, secret passwords, and could write to Dennis for agony aunt-type advice. A badge that a lot of readers were after was a Gnasher badge with googly eyes and a fur-like texture. The fan club was instantly popular, recalls Euan Kerr in 1984; \"The club enrolled over 2000 new members every week, well into the 90s and there were similar numbers of letters and drawings.\" A spin-off was introduced called Gnasher's Fang Club, and Gnasher would ask readers to send him stories about their pets' adventures which could be printed into the next issue. \"The mailbag of little drawings of pets was several thousand per week,\" remembers sub-editor Morris Heggie. \"And the popularity lasted and lasted.\"\n2018 was the 80th anniversary, so D.C. Thomson released a limited-editioned 80 Years boxset, which contained eight classic comics, a free Gnasher toy, a double-sided A1 poster with the roster of 255 characters, an A4 poster for framing, and 4 A6 art cards.\n\"The Beano\" is so popular that it had its own section of the Chessington World of Adventures theme park, \"Beanoland\". This opened in 2000 and survived for a decade before sponsorship was eventually lost. Most of the major Beanoland attractions remain in operation today but have been rethemed as \"Wild Asia\".\nOn 19 March 2012 Royal Mail launched a special stamp collection to celebrate Britain's rich comic book history. The collection featured \"The Beano\", \"The Dandy\", \"Eagle\", \"The Topper\", \"Roy of the Rovers\", \"Bunty\", \"Buster\", \"Valiant\", \"Twinkle\" and \"2000 AD\".\nEditors.\nThe original editor was George Moonie from 1938 to 1959; followed by Harold Cramond from 1959 to 1984.\nEuan Kerr was editor from 1984 until he handed over the reins to Alan Digby in early 2006. Digby had been \"Beano\" Chief Sub Editor when Kerr first became editor, and later edited \"The Beezer\". Kerr has returned to edit \"BeanoMAX\" as of issue 2 (see below). Following the retirement of Kerr, Digby took over as Editor-in-Chief of both titles. Digby retired in 2011, leaving Michael Stirling as the new editor.\nThe following editor of \"The Beano\" was Craig Graham, who joined \"The Beano\" once \"The Dandy\" announced its closure. Upon his arrival as editor, he made many changes to \"The Beano\".\nRevamps.\nThe \"Beano\"'s first major revamp was in the 50th birthday issue of 1988, when the page number was increased, the comic had a wider paper style, and more colour was used throughout. Another occurred in issue 2,674, dated 16 October 1993, when the whole comic was now printed in full colour, along with some new strips such as \"The Numskulls\", which had been moved from \"The Beezer\".\nNo major revamps happened from then until 1998, when Dennis's baby sister Bea was born. The logo was rounded and embossed (but later flattened in February 1999), and there were 8 extra pages. Computers were starting to be used for articles and speech bubbles, rather than the usual hand drawn ones.\nSince April 2007, \"The Beano\" has had five revamps to help it keep up to date. The first occurred on 7 April 2007. The logo was raised using a heavy black drop shadow, and the body of the lettering and its yellow trim were separated by a subtle 3D groove effect. The website address was looped inside the \"O\". This logo had been used in the Beano Club for one issue in 2006. Two new comic strips were introduced, these being \"The Riot Squad\" and \"Fred's Bed\", reprints from \"Hoot\" and \"The Breezer\" and \"Topper\" respectively. There was a record number of uncredited reprints, with the likes of \"Ivy the Terrible\", \"Calamity James\", \"Les Pretend\" also being reprinted.\nThe second happened on 27 October 2007. The logo was still grooved, but was now back to the rounded style which it had from 1999 to 2006. It was quite similar to the original rounded logo from 1998, which was flattened the following year. The number of reprint pages was cut from 4 to 2, but more started to appear after about a month. Two new strips were also added, \"Johnny Bean from Happy Bunny Green\" and \"London B412\". The price increased to 99p across the whole UK.\nThe third was the least major revamp. The background was changed from one colour behind the logo and another behind the Dennis strip to one single colour or a pattern, such as red and black stripes. New fonts were being used on the front cover, and the \"Pocket money price\" logo had been changed to a large \"WOW! 99p\" which was usually placed in the top corners. No new strips were added this time, but the amount of reprints went up to 5, sometimes lowering back to 4 per week, and an extra \"Dennis\" strip was added on the inside back two pages.\nThe fourth revamp, which happened with the issue dated 18 October 2008, is the most major revamp to date. There was a return of \"Billy the Cat\" inside, as well as a new \"Super School\" strip by Lew Stringer. The price rose to \u00a31.25 per issue. Different characters appear on the 'O' each week in a cleaner and tidier embossed logo. New headline fonts were introduced (CCZoinks); the balloon font was also changed to Cloudsplitter by Blambot. But the main change was the paper style, which had finally changed from newsprint to a glossy paper, much in the style of the inside pages of the then companion papers \"Dandy Xtreme\" and \"BeanoMAX\". The only difference between these paper styles is the front cover, which was thicker on the \"Dandy Xtreme\" and \"BeanoMAX\", but the same as the pages throughout in the weekly \"Beano\".\nAs of late 2010, \"The Beano\" is printed by BGP and the comic is now in an A4 format. A mild revision of style accompanies this with balloon font changed to CCTimeSaleLower, an upper and lower case font and a much larger Beano logo on the cover. The font CCZoinks appears to have less prominence with CreativeBlockBold taking centre stage. The Beano Club was closed down in 2010 and its pages changed to Beano VIP with more online presence. The paper is still glossy, but the paper stock gives it a matte feel. At the start of 2011, the Beano VIP pages were dropped from the comic, but the online features remain.\nIn the issue dated 12 October 2011, there was another revamp. The comic was expanded to 36 pages, and the paper stock was made smoother. The \"Number 13\" and \"The Germs\" strips returned as reprints. A reader's page was also reintroduced, this time titled the Menace Gallery. After two appearances, this was renamed \"The Treehouse\".\nIn the issue dated 28 January 2012, \"The Beano\"'s cover changed. The logo was now more like the logo from 1972\u20131998, but with \"The\" inside the B much like later versions of the logo. The special \"O\"s that had appeared sometimes in the last year were also kept. The first panel of the Dennis &amp; Gnasher strip also appeared on the cover, like from 1972 to 2008, but the \"This Week in Beanotown\" feature still appeared across the bottom.\nIn late 2012, Craig Graham took over as Beano editor and revamped the comic. As a result, two mini-strip pages titled \"Funsize Funnies\" were introduced and featured \"Simply Smiffy\", \"Rasher\", \"Little Plum\", \"Les Pretend\", \"Pup Parade\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" as well as two new strips \"Gnash Gnews\" and Winston and also introduced artists such as Wilbur Dawbarn (who took over Billy Whizz from Nick Brennan), Lew Stringer (not seen in the Beano since Super School), Alexander Matthews, Paul Palmer and Nigel Auchterlounie. Auchterlounie soon took over writing \"Dennis the Menace and Gnasher\" also which had returned to its pre-2009 style with new characters from the 2009 TV series. In January 2013, \"Biffo the Bear\", \"Pansy Potter\", \"Lord Snooty\" and \"Gnipper\" were added to the Funsize Funnies, introducing Graham Howie to the Beano and being the return of Wayne Thompson. Later that year, two new comic strips were added called \"Big Time Charlie\" and \"Tricky Dicky\" (relaunch of the classic Topper star) and \"Stunt Gran\", \"BamBeanos\", \"BSK CCTV\" joined the Funsize Funnies replacing Gnash Gnews, Pup Parade and Pansy Potter. Puzzle pages frequently appeared in the comic now, with Jamie Smart and Lew Stringer originally drawing the puzzles, and later on other artists such as Steve Beckett and Barrie Appleby.\nGnashional Menace Day and the 70th birthday.\nAs a celebration, in partnership with the CLIC Sargent charity, 2 August 2008 was Gnashional Menace Day, where children were sponsored to behave like Dennis. The anniversary was also celebrated with a 40-page issue (instead of 32 pages; the 60th birthday issue also had extra pages, 48 instead of 24) guest edited by \"Wallace and Gromit\" creator Nick Park, price \u00a31.50 (not 99p) and an issue of Classics from the Comics devoted to \"The Beano\". There is also a special 64-page book available, \"The Beano Special Collectors Edition: 70 Years of Fun\", giving a brief history of the comic. In \"The Beano\"'s home city of Dundee, a special exhibition was held at the University of Dundee featuring original artwork and other memorabilia loaned from D.C. Thomson \u2013 it ran until 20 September 2008. In London The Cartoon Museum showed the exhibition \"Beano and Dandy Birthday Bash!\" from 30 July to 2 November 2008, featuring original artwork from all eight decades of both \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\", including work by Dudley D. Watkins, David Law, Leo Baxendale and Ken Reid as well as David Sutherland and many contemporary artists. There were events for children throughout August.\nThere was also a special coffee table book, \"\", published by Waverly Books.\n75th anniversary, changes.\nIn the 75th Anniversary Special, \"The Beano\" had yet another revamp introducing celebrities as regular characters. As a result, all of the Funsize Funnies as well as the two new recently added comic strips \"Tricky Dicky\" and \"Big Time Charlie\" plus the reprinted \"Calamity James\" were all dropped. \"Bananaman\" came out of Geering reprints after being in them for over a year with Wayne Thompson reprising the role of artist after drawing him previously in \"The Dandy\" from 2010 to 2012. \"Roger the Dodger\" was taken over by Jamie Smart and \"Ball Boy\" was taken over by Alexander Matthews and completely relaunched. Nigel Auchterlounie also took over as scriptwriter of \"The Bash Street Kids\" and \"Bananaman\", as well as now both writing and drawing \"The Numskulls\" which itself had had a huge relaunch with one-off celebrities replacing the role of Edd starting with Ant and Dec.\n12-year-old artist Zoom Rockman also joined \"The Beano\" in this issue, drawing \"Skanky Pigeon\" which appeared monthly. In the issue after the 75th Anniversary Special, fourteen new comic strips joined \"The Beano\" with twelve of these becoming the new Funsize Funnies stories, all of which are parodies of either a celebrity or television show: \"High School Moozical\", \"Neigh-Bours\", \"Celebrity Believe It or Not\", \"I Pity the School\", \"Murs Attacks\", \"Ashley's Banjo\", \"Coronation Bleat\", \"Jose's Back\", \"Simon's Bowel\", \"Guess Who?\", \"Watch-Hog\" and \"Danny Diddly O'Donoghue\" as well as two new one-page stories to replace \"Tricky Dicky\" and \"Big Time Charlie\": \"El Poco Loco\" and \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turkeys\".\nStu Munro also took over as both puzzle page artist (as he did in \"The Dandy\") and \"The Dandy's Madvertisements\" were brought back with Stu Munro once again drawing them. Since the 75th Anniversary Special revamp, \"The Beano\" has now gained Andy Fanton, Stephen Waller, Dean Rankine, Garry Davies and Rick Eades all from \"The Dandy\" and the only original Beano artists that remain in the comic are David Sutherland, Laura Howell and Nigel Parkinson since Barrie Appleby, Barry Glennard, Hunt Emerson and Dave Eastbury all appear to have gone.\n80th anniversary.\nThere were several milestone releases for the 80th anniversary in 2018. As well as the 80th Year boxset full of prizes, issue 3945 was guest edited by actor-turned children's author David Walliams and had a large crossover story about Bash Street School opening the Beanotown's 1938 time capsule and discovering a map, which leads to robots and a giant tentacle monster breaking out to attack the residents. There was also a flashback panel of the time capsule being sealed which featured a handful of comic strip characters from the first issue, later helping the present day characters discover how to defeat the tentacle monster, named Simon.\n\"The Beano\" was also the face of the 2018 Summer Reading Challenge, called Mischief Makers, which included a special Dennis the Menace novel tie-in called \"Dennis the Menace and the Chamber of Mischief\" by Beano artist Nigel Auchterlounie. The Dennis the Menace Fan Club was re-launched as a phone app, rebranded as The Dennis and Gnasher Fan Club, and allowed readers free membership, printable badges, and pranks. On television, the Sky Kids show \"SO Beano!\" aired; a TV show with special guests, children presenters, and fun and games, in a similar style to \"Friday Download\" and \"Scrambled!\"\nClassic comics also returned in a three-panel format in issues, mostly starring Big Eggo, Biffo the Bear and two special holiday books were published: a summer special and a Christmas special. Meanwhile, the 2019 annual included a double-page inner front and back cover full of 255 characters that have appeared over the comic's publications.\nStrips.\nA number of strips in the comic have run for a very long time. The top five longest running Beano comic strips are, in descending order, \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"Bash Street Kids\", \"Roger the Dodger\", and then the last holder of the title before \"Dennis\", \"Lord Snooty\".\n\"Dennis the Menace\"'s famous red and black jersey had formed the colours of a few of the \"Beano\" characters' clothes (\"Minnie the Minx\" has the same, although the placement of the stripes is a bit different; \"Ball Boy\"&amp;apos;s was a vertical red and black; \"Roger the Dodger\" has a chessboard design top, and Danny (from the \"Bash Street Kids\") has a similar cap), but they have changed for \"Minnie\" and \"Ball Boy\" (\"Minnie\" at one point had a red and yellow top and \"Ball Boy\"&amp;apos;s strip is now black and blue).\nThere are frequent fictional crossovers between \"Beano\" characters, with most of the characters living in the fictional \"Beanotown\". Many of the comic strips in \"The Dandy\" are drawn by the same artists, and crossovers between the two comic magazines also occur occasionally. Quite often, one magazine will make a tongue-in-cheek jibe at the other (e.g., a character meeting an elderly lady, and stating that she's \"older than the jokes in \"The Dandy\"\"). In the strips, it is expressed that the two towns are rivals with each other and before \"The Dandy\" did a drastic format change they had an embassy in \"Beanotown\" which many of the town's citizens attempted to overrun, but failed (the embassy had no existence in \"The Beano\"). This rivalry inspired the spin-off computer game \"Beanotown Racing\", in which various characters from both comics could be raced around points in \"Beanotown\", including the Embassy. The game was given a large amount of advance publicity in the comics, with storylines often revolving how the characters each acquired his/her vehicle.\nOccasionally there are longer than usual strips, for example, a strip of sixteen pages rather than the usual two pages. These longer strips include \"The Bash Street Kids\" Adventures written and drawn by Kev F Sutherland which since 2004 have featured parodies of famous comic strip images, including \"Amazing Fantasy\"'s first \"Spider-Man\" cover, Action Comics' first \"Superman\" cover, and most recently the cover of \"X-Men\" No. 100.\nReader polls.\nDuring the 1980s, \"The Beano\" ran a 'Readers' Request' feature where readers could request for a particular comic strip to feature in the Beano. This led to the return of dropped characters, including \"Little Plum\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"The McTickles\", but also led to the introduction of new strips such as \"Little Monkey\".\nReader polls started to appear in the 1990s, allowing the readers to rate the strips in the comic. These polls have been quite influential, as they indicate which strips the readers like best, and strips that have performed poorly in these polls were usually dropped.\nOn a number of occasions, \"The Beano\" has allowed its readers to vote for which new strips they want to appear in the comic. This usually consists of three new comic strips being run for a number of weeks and the readers can vote on which strips they prefer and the one that receives the most votes stays in \"The Beano\". Readers have been able to cast their votes via telephone, or more recently via\"The Beano\" website.\nThe first such vote occurred in 1995 with \"Vic Volcano\" emerging as the winner. In the 1997 competition, two new strips were added permanently, with \"Tim Traveller\" winning and \"Crazy for Daisy\" the runner-up. By the early 2000s, these competitions were named Comic Idol (in reference to \"Pop Idol\"). In the 2004 competition, the margin between winner \"Joe Jitsu\" and runner-up \"Colin the Vet\" was 1%, so both strips were added to the comic.\nThe most recent incarnation in 2010 featured three new strips, \"Meebo and Zuky\", \"Home Invasion\", and \"Uh oh Si Co!\". \"Meebo and Zuky\" won, with \"Home Invasion\" finishing as runner-up, though only \"Meebo and Zuky\" were added to the comic. In 2011, the Dandy did a similar competition where readers voted for their favourite out of four strips, entitled \"Strictly Come Laughing\" (a reference to \"Strictly Come Dancing\").\nSpin-off comics.\nComic libraries.\nSince 1982 the comic, along with \"The Dandy\", has also run \"Comic Library\" titles. Released monthly, these titles are a feature-length (usually about 64-page) adventure, featuring a character from the comic itself. They are available in A5 size only. In 1998, these were replaced by the \"Fun Size Beano\". Fun Size Comics were discontinued in late 2010.\n\"Beano Specials\".\nThe comic also ran A4-sized \"Beano Specials\" in 1987 with full coloured pages, which later were replaced by \"Beano Superstars\" which ran for 121 issues from 1992\u20132002. These were similar to the Comic Library series. Some of the last issues were printed versions of episodes from the 1996\u20131998 \"Dennis and Gnasher\" animated TV series. A \"Beano Poster Comic\" series was also printed in the early 1990s.\nThe Beano Specials returned in 2003, and were now published seasonally. The issues were numbered, and the first one was a Dennis and Friends special, the last a Christmas reprint special. These were replaced by BeanoMAX in early 2007.\nBeanoMAX.\nOn 15 February 2007, the first issue of a monthly comic entitled \"BeanoMAX\" was published. The sister comic features many of the same characters; however, the stories in \"BeanoMAX\" are written in a longer format meant for 10- to 13-year-olds. The first issue was a Comic Relief special featuring assorted celebrity guests. The magazine has been rebranded several times since 2013, and is currently known as \"EPIC Magazine\".\n\"Plug\".\n\"Plug\" was a comic based on the eponymous character from \"The Bash Street Kids\" that began with issue dated 24 September 1977, and is notable for being the first comic to make use of rotogravure printing. The magazine similar in style to I.P.C's \"Krazy\" which had started the previous year. It contained uncharacteristically outlandish material for D C. Thomson, as well as later including celebrity appearances in the comic.\nThe comic revealed Plug's full name to be Percival Proudfoot Plugsley and also gave him a pet monkey by the name of Chumkee. Plug's strip was mostly drawn by Vic Neill but other artists, including Dave Gudgeon drew some later strips. Other strips included \"Antchester United\", \"Violent Elizabeth\", \"Eebagoom\", \"Hugh's Zoo\" and \"D'ye Ken John Squeal and his Hopeless Hounds\".\nThe venture was unsuccessful, in part because the comic cost 9p, with the \"Beano\" at the time only costing 4p and most of its rivals priced similarly. It merged with \"The Beezer\" on 24 February 1979.\n\"Dennis and Gnasher\".\nThe brand new \"Dennis and Gnasher\" was launched separately from \"The Beano\" in September 2009.\n\"Dennis and Gnasher\" got their own TV series on CBBC from 7 September 2009 to accompany the comic's new look. This was their second, having also had one in 1996, which ran for two series on CBBC, \"The Children's Channel\", and \"Fox Kids\". It also marked the debut of this Dennis in the US, as \"The Beano\" is not distributed in the US and the title is taken by the \"newspaper comic strip\"- the series aired from 10 October 2010 to 10 December 2013 on what was then known as \"The Hub\" (now renamed \"Discovery Family\").\n\"BeanOLD\".\n43-page special issue 4063, with cover date 21 January 2021, during a lockdown in the COVID-19 pandemic had an eight-page adult pullout named \"BeanOLD\", with cartoons poking fun at British politicians such as Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings, and with appearances by Greta Thunberg, Captain Tom, and footballer Marcus Rashford. The slogan was \"2020 has been tough. So tough that even grown-ups need \"Beano\"\".\nBeano Studios.\nOn 8 June 2016, it was announced via a press release that \"The Beano\" would now form a studio under their name. The studio would be used to bring their characters to life via other forms of media, such as television, film and live performances, to allow their properties to be distributed around the world for all audiences. Soon after the announcement of the studio's formation, news was released about a new television series based upon the company's famous \"Dennis the Menace\" property which, unlike its previous versions, would be created in CGI rather than the classic 2D-style drawing. The studio would also revamp the website \"beano.com\". On 6 November 2017 the first series of \"\" was aired on CBBC and in February 2019 it was announced that CBBC had ordered a further 52 episodes."}
{"id": "4654", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4654", "title": "Bee", "text": "Bees are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants, known for their role in pollination and, in the case of the best-known bee species, the western honey bee, for producing honey. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea. They are presently considered a clade, called Anthophila. There are over 16,000 known species of bees in seven recognized biological families. Some species \u2013 including honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless bees \u2013 live socially in colonies while some species \u2013 including mason bees, carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, and sweat bees \u2013 are solitary.\nBees are found on every continent except for Antarctica, in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants. The most common bees in the Northern Hemisphere are the Halictidae, or sweat bees, but they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies. Bees range in size from tiny stingless bee species, whose workers are less than long, to \"Megachile pluto\", the largest species of leafcutter bee, whose females can attain a length of .\nBees feed on nectar and pollen, the former primarily as an energy source and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients. Most pollen is used as food for their larvae. Vertebrate predators of bees include birds such as bee-eaters; insect predators include beewolves and dragonflies.\nBee pollination is important both ecologically and commercially, and the decline in wild bees has increased the value of pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees. The analysis of 353 wild bee and hoverfly species across Britain from 1980 to 2013 found the insects have been lost from a quarter of the places they inhabited in 1980.\nHuman beekeeping or apiculture has been practised for millennia, since at least the times of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece. Bees have appeared in mythology and folklore, through all phases of art and literature from ancient times to the present day, although primarily focused in the Northern Hemisphere where beekeeping is far more common.\nEvolution.\nThe ancestors of bees were wasps in the family Crabronidae, which were predators of other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. This same evolutionary scenario may have occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the pollen wasps evolved from predatory ancestors. Until recently, the oldest non-compression bee fossil had been found in New Jersey amber, \"Cretotrigona prisca\" of Cretaceous age, a corbiculate bee. A bee fossil from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya), \"Melittosphex burmensis\", is considered \"an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees\". Derived features of its morphology (apomorphies) place it clearly within the bees, but it retains two unmodified ancestral traits (plesiomorphies) of the legs (two mid-tibial spurs, and a slender hind basitarsus), showing its transitional status. By the Eocene (~45 mya) there was already considerable diversity among eusocial bee lineages.\nThe highly eusocial corbiculate Apidae appeared roughly 87 Mya, and the Allodapini (within the Apidae) around 53 Mya.\nThe Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene (~25 Mya) to early Miocene.\nThe Melittidae are known from \"Palaeomacropis eocenicus\" in the Early Eocene.\nThe Megachilidae are known from trace fossils (characteristic leaf cuttings) from the Middle Eocene.\nThe Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, around 34 Mya, of the Florissant shale.\nThe Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species found in amber. The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age.\nCoevolution.\nThe earliest animal-pollinated flowers were shallow, cup-shaped blooms pollinated by insects such as beetles, so the syndrome of insect pollination was well established before the first appearance of bees. The novelty is that bees are specialized as pollination agents, with behavioral and physical modifications that specifically enhance pollination, and are the most efficient pollinating insects. In a process of coevolution, flowers developed floral rewards such as nectar and longer tubes, and bees developed longer tongues to extract the nectar. Bees also developed structures known as scopal hairs and pollen baskets to collect and carry pollen. The location and type differ among and between groups of bees. Most species have scopal hairs on their hind legs or on the underside of their abdomens. Some species in the family Apidae have pollen baskets on their hind legs, while very few lack these and instead collect pollen in their crops. The appearance of these structures drove the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, bees themselves. Bees coevolved not only with flowers but it is believed that some species coevolved with mites. Some provide tufts of hairs called acarinaria that appear to provide lodgings for mites; in return, it is believed that mites eat fungi that attack pollen, so the relationship in this case may be mutualistc.\nPhylogeny.\nExternal.\nThis phylogenetic tree is based on Debevic \"et al\", 2012, which used molecular phylogeny to demonstrate that the bees (Anthophila) arose from deep within the Crabronidae, which is therefore paraphyletic. The placement of the Heterogynaidae is uncertain. The small subfamily Mellininae was not included in this analysis.\nInternal.\nThis cladogram of the bee families is based on Hedtke et al., 2013, which places the former families Dasypodaidae and Meganomiidae as subfamilies inside the Melittidae. English names, where available, are given in parentheses.\nCharacteristics.\nBees differ from closely related groups such as wasps by having branched or plume-like setae (hairs), combs on the forelimbs for cleaning their antennae, small anatomical differences in limb structure, and the venation of the hind wings; and in females, by having the seventh dorsal abdominal plate divided into two half-plates.\nBees have the following characteristics:\nThe largest species of bee is thought to be Wallace's giant bee \"Megachile pluto\", whose females can attain a length of . The smallest species may be dwarf stingless bees in the tribe Meliponini whose workers are less than in length.\nSociality.\nHaplodiploid breeding system.\nAccording to inclusive fitness theory, organisms can gain fitness not just through increasing their own reproductive output, but also that of close relatives. In evolutionary terms, individuals should help relatives when \"Cost &lt; Relatedness * Benefit\". The requirements for eusociality are more easily fulfilled by haplodiploid species such as bees because of their unusual relatedness structure.\nIn haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs. Because a male is haploid (has only one copy of each gene), his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other. This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton termed \"supersisters\", more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring. Workers often do not reproduce, but they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters (as queens) than they would by having their own offspring (each of which would only have 50% of their genes), assuming they would produce similar numbers. This unusual situation has been proposed as an explanation of the multiple (at least 9) evolutions of eusociality within Hymenoptera.\nHaplodiploidy is neither necessary nor sufficient for eusociality. Some eusocial species such as termites are not haplodiploid. Conversely, all bees are haplodiploid but not all are eusocial, and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males, creating half-sisters that share only 25% of each-other's genes. But, monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees.\nEusociality.\nBees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities. Eusociality appears to have originated from at least three independent origins in halictid bees. The most advanced of these are species with eusocial colonies; these are characterised by cooperative brood care and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive adults, plus overlapping generations. This division of labour creates specialized groups within eusocial societies which are called castes. In some species, groups of cohabiting females may be sisters, and if there is a division of labour within the group, they are considered semisocial. The group is called eusocial if, in addition, the group consists of a mother (the queen) and her daughters (workers). When the castes are purely behavioural alternatives, with no morphological differentiation other than size, the system is considered primitively eusocial, as in many paper wasps; when the castes are morphologically discrete, the system is considered highly eusocial.\nTrue honey bees (genus \"Apis\", of which seven species are currently recognized) are highly eusocial, and are among the best known insects. Their colonies are established by swarms, consisting of a queen and several hundred workers. There are 29 subspecies of one of these species, \"Apis mellifera\", native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of \"A. mellifera\" that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies; they are extremely defensive.\nStingless bees are also highly eusocial. They practise mass provisioning, with complex nest architecture and perennial colonies also established via swarming.\nMany bumblebees are eusocial, similar to the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets in that the queen initiates a nest on her own rather than by swarming. Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer. Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the pre-existing nest cavity, and colonies rarely last more than a year. In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species worldwide using the IUCN Red List criteria.\nThere are many more species of primitively eusocial than highly eusocial bees, but they have been studied less often. Most are in the family Halictidae, or \"sweat bees\". Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average. Queens and workers differ only in size, if at all. Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females hibernate. A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds, such as \"Halictus hesperus\". Some species are eusocial in parts of their range and solitary in others, or have a mix of eusocial and solitary nests in the same population. The orchid bees (Apidae) include some primitively eusocial species with similar biology. Some allodapine bees (Apidae) form primitively eusocial colonies, with progressive provisioning: a larva's food is supplied gradually as it develops, as is the case in honey bees and some bumblebees.\nSolitary and communal bees.\nMost other bees, including familiar insects such as carpenter bees, leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself. There is no division of labor so these nests lack queens and \"worker\" bees for these species. Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax. \nBees collect pollen to feed their young, and have the necessary adaptations to do this. However, certain wasp species such as pollen wasps have similar behaviours, and a few species of bee scavenge from carcases to feed their offspring. Solitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood. Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency. Some solitary bees have advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies. Very few species of solitary bee are being cultured for commercial pollination. Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences, namely: carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, plasterer bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees and digger bees.\nMost solitary bees nest in the ground in a variety of soil textures and conditions while others create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, holes in wood. The female typically creates a compartment (a \"cell\") with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off. A nest may consist of numerous cells. When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males. The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests. The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge. Solitary bees are either stingless or very unlikely to sting (only in self-defense, if ever).\nWhile solitary, females each make individual nests. Some species, such as the European mason bee \"Hoplitis anthocopoides\", and the Dawson's Burrowing bee, \"Amegilla dawsoni,\" are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, and giving the appearance of being social. Large groups of solitary bee nests are called \"aggregations\", to distinguish them from colonies. In some species, multiple females share a common nest, but each makes and provisions her own cells independently. This type of group is called \"communal\" and is not uncommon. The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when multiple females use that same entrance regularly.\nBiology.\nLife cycle.\nThe life cycle of a bee, be it a solitary or social species, involves the laying of an egg, the development through several moults of a legless larva, a pupation stage during which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis, followed by the emergence of a winged adult. Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom. The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate. The sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilised; after mating, a female stores the sperm, and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid, fertilised eggs producing female offspring and unfertilised eggs, males. Tropical bees may have several generations in a year and no diapause stage.\nThe egg is generally oblong, slightly curved and tapering at one end. Solitary bees, lay each egg in a separate cell with a supply of mixed pollen and nectar next to it. This may be rolled into a pellet or placed in a pile and is known as mass provisioning. Social bee species provision progressively, that is, they feed the larva regularly while it grows. The nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood, in solitary bees, to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees.\nIn most species, larvae are whitish grubs, roughly oval and bluntly-pointed at both ends. They have 15 segments and spiracles in each segment for breathing. They have no legs but move within the cell, helped by tubercles on their sides. They have short horns on the head, jaws for chewing food and an appendage on either side of the mouth tipped with a bristle. There is a gland under the mouth that secretes a viscous liquid which solidifies into the silk they use to produce a cocoon. The cocoon is semi-transparent and the pupa can be seen through it. Over the course of a few days, the larva undergoes metamorphosis into a winged adult. When ready to emerge, the adult splits its skin dorsally and climbs out of the exuviae and breaks out of the cell.\nFlight.\nAntoine Magnan's 1934 book \"Le vol des insectes\", says that he and Andr\u00e9 Sainte-Lagu\u00eb had applied the equations of air resistance to insects and found that their flight could not be explained by fixed-wing calculations, but that \"One shouldn't be surprised that the results of the calculations don't square with reality\". This has led to a common misconception that bees \"violate aerodynamic theory\". In fact it merely confirms that bees do not engage in fixed-wing flight, and that their flight is explained by other mechanics, such as those used by helicopters. In 1996 it was shown that vortices created by many insects' wings helped to provide lift. High-speed cinematography and robotic mock-up of a bee wing showed that lift was generated by \"the unconventional combination of short, choppy wing strokes, a rapid rotation of the wing as it flops over and reverses direction, and a very fast wing-beat frequency\". Wing-beat frequency normally increases as size decreases, but as the bee's wing beat covers such a small arc, it flaps approximately 230 times per second, faster than a fruitfly (200 times per second) which is 80 times smaller.\nNavigation, communication, and finding food.\nThe ethologist Karl von Frisch studied navigation in the honey bee. He showed that honey bees communicate by the waggle dance, in which a worker indicates the location of a food source to other workers in the hive. He demonstrated that bees can recognize a desired compass direction in three different ways: by the sun, by the polarization pattern of the blue sky, and by the earth's magnetic field. He showed that the sun is the preferred or main compass; the other mechanisms are used under cloudy skies or inside a dark beehive. Bees navigate using spatial memory with a \"rich, map-like organization\".\nDigestion.\nThe gut of bees is relatively simple, but multiple metabolic strategies exist in the gut microbiota. Pollinating bees consume nectar and pollen, which require different digestion strategies by somewhat specialized bacteria. While nectar is a liquid of mostly monosaccharide sugars and so easily absorbed, pollen contains complex polysaccharides: branching pectin and hemicellulose. Approximately five groups of bacteria are involved in digestion. Three groups specialize in simple sugars (\"Snodgrassella\" and two groups of \"Lactobacillus\"), and two other groups in complex sugars (\"Gilliamella\" and \"Bifidobacterium\"). Digestion of pectin and hemicellulose is dominated by bacterial clades \"Gilliamella\" and \"Bifidobacterium\" respectively. Bacteria that cannot digest polysaccharides obtain enzymes from their neighbors, and bacteria that lack certain amino acids do the same, creating multiple ecological niches.\nAlthough most bee species are nectarivorous and palynivorous, some are not. Particularly unusual are vulture bees in the genus \"Trigona,\" which consume carrion and wasp brood, turning meat into a honey-like substance.\nEcology.\nFloral relationships.\nMost bees are polylectic (generalist) meaning they collect pollen from a range of flowering plants, but some are oligoleges (specialists), in that they only gather pollen from one or a few species or genera of closely related plants. Specialist pollinators also include bee species which gather floral oils instead of pollen, and male orchid bees, which gather aromatic compounds from orchids (one of the few cases where male bees are effective pollinators). Bees are able to sense the presence of desirable flowers through ultraviolet patterning on flowers, floral odors, and even electromagnetic fields. Once landed, a bee then uses nectar quality and pollen taste to determine whether to continue visiting similar flowers.\nIn rare cases, a plant species may only be effectively pollinated by a single bee species, and some plants are endangered at least in part because their pollinator is also threatened. But, there is a pronounced tendency for oligolectic bees to be associated with common, widespread plants visited by multiple pollinator species. For example, the creosote bush in the arid parts of the United States southwest is associated with some 40 oligoleges.\nAs mimics and models.\nMany bees are aposematically coloured, typically orange and black, warning of their ability to defend themselves with a powerful sting. As such they are models for Batesian mimicry by non-stinging insects such as bee-flies, robber flies and hoverflies, all of which gain a measure of protection by superficially looking and behaving like bees.\nBees are themselves M\u00fcllerian mimics of other aposematic insects with the same colour scheme, including wasps, lycid and other beetles, and many butterflies and moths (Lepidoptera) which are themselves distasteful, often through acquiring bitter and poisonous chemicals from their plant food. All the M\u00fcllerian mimics, including bees, benefit from the reduced risk of predation that results from their easily recognised warning coloration.\nBees are also mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate (pseudocopulation) with the furry lip of the flower, thus pollinating it.\nAs brood parasites.\nBrood parasites occur in several bee families including the apid subfamily Nomadinae. Females of these species lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests. They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee. When the \"cuckoo\" bee larva hatches, it consumes the host larva's pollen ball, and often the host egg also. In particular, the Arctic bee species, \"Bombus hyperboreus\" is an aggressive species that attacks and enslaves other bees of the same subgenus. However, unlike many other bee brood parasites, they have pollen baskets and often collect pollen.\nIn Southern Africa, hives of African honeybees (\"A. mellifera scutellata\") are being destroyed by parasitic workers of the Cape honeybee, \"A. m. capensis\". These lay diploid eggs (\"thelytoky\"), escaping normal worker policing, leading to the colony's destruction; the parasites can then move to other hives.\nThe cuckoo bees in the \"Bombus\" subgenus \"Psithyrus\" are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size. This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle \"Emery's rule\". Others parasitize bees in different families, like \"Townsendiella\", a nomadine apid, two species of which are cleptoparasites of the dasypodaid genus \"Hesperapis\", while the other species in the same genus attacks halictid bees.\nNocturnal bees.\nFour bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular. Most are tropical or subtropical, but some live in arid regions at higher latitudes. These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images. Some have refracting superposition compound eyes: these combine the output of many elements of their compound eyes to provide enough light for each retinal photoreceptor. Their ability to fly by night enables them to avoid many predators, and to exploit flowers that produce nectar only or also at night.\nPredators, parasites and pathogens.\nVertebrate predators of bees include bee-eaters, shrikes and flycatchers, which make short sallies to catch insects in flight. Swifts and swallows fly almost continually, catching insects as they go. The honey buzzard attacks bees' nests and eats the larvae. The greater honeyguide interacts with humans by guiding them to the nests of wild bees. The humans break open the nests and take the honey and the bird feeds on the larvae and the wax. Among mammals, predators such as the badger dig up bumblebee nests and eat both the larvae and any stored food.\nSpecialist ambush predators of visitors to flowers include crab spiders, which wait on flowering plants for pollinating insects; predatory bugs, and praying mantises, some of which (the flower mantises of the tropics) wait motionless, aggressive mimics camouflaged as flowers. Beewolves are large wasps that habitually attack bees; the ethologist Niko Tinbergen estimated that a single colony of the beewolf \"Philanthus triangulum\" might kill several thousand honeybees in a day: all the prey he observed were honeybees. Other predatory insects that sometimes catch bees include robber flies and dragonflies. Honey bees are affected by parasites including acarine and \"Varroa\" mites. However, some bees are believed to have a mutualistic relationship with mites.\nRelationship with humans.\nIn mythology and folklore.\nHomer's \"Hymn to Hermes\" describes three bee-maidens with the power of divination and thus speaking truth, and identifies the food of the gods as honey. Sources associated the bee maidens with Apollo and, until the 1980s, scholars followed Gottfried Hermann (1806) in incorrectly identifying the bee-maidens with the Thriae. Honey, according to a Greek myth, was discovered by a nymph called Melissa (\"Bee\"); and honey was offered to the Greek gods from Mycenean times. Bees were also associated with the Delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee.\nThe image of a community of honey bees has been used from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, and by political and social theorists such as Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx as a model for human society. In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as \"Telling the bees\".\nIn art and literature.\nSome of the oldest examples of bees in art are rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC.\nW. B. Yeats's poem \"The Lake Isle of Innisfree\" (1888) contains the couplet \"Nine bean rows will I have there, a hive for the honey bee, / And live alone in the bee loud glade.\" At the time he was living in Bedford Park in the West of London. Beatrix Potter's illustrated book \"The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse\" (1910) features Babbity Bumble and her brood \"(pictured)\". Kit Williams' treasure hunt book \"The Bee on the Comb\" (1984) uses bees and beekeeping as part of its story and puzzle. Sue Monk Kidd's \"The Secret Life of Bees\" (2004), and the 2009 film starring Dakota Fanning, tells the story of a girl who escapes her abusive home and finds her way to live with a family of beekeepers, the Boatwrights.\nThe humorous 2007 animated film \"Bee Movie\" used Jerry Seinfeld's first script and was his first work for children; he starred as a bee named Barry B. Benson, alongside Ren\u00e9e Zellweger. Critics found its premise awkward and its delivery tame. Dave Goulson's \"A Sting in the Tale\" (2014) describes his efforts to save bumblebees in Britain, as well as much about their biology. The playwright Laline Paull's fantasy \"The Bees\" (2015) tells the tale of a hive bee named Flora 717 from hatching onwards.\nBeekeeping.\nHumans have kept honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, for millennia. Beekeepers collect honey, beeswax, propolis, pollen, and royal jelly from hives; bees are also kept to pollinate crops and to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers.\nDepictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago; efforts to domesticate them are shown in Egyptian art around 4,500 years ago. Simple hives and smoke were used; jars of honey were found in the tombs of pharaohs such as Tutankhamun. From the 18th century, European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the colony. Among Classical Era authors, beekeeping with the use of smoke is described in Aristotle's \"History of Animals\" Book 9. The account mentions that bees die after stinging; that workers remove corpses from the hive, and guard it; castes including workers and non-working drones, but \"kings\" rather than queens; predators including toads and bee-eaters; and the waggle dance, with the \"irresistible suggestion\" of \u03acp\u03bf\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 (\"aroseiontai\", it waggles) and \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03c5\u03b8\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd (\"parakolouthousin\", they watch).\nBeekeeping is described in detail by Virgil in his \"Georgics\"; it is also mentioned in his \"Aeneid\", and in Pliny's \"Natural History\".\nAs commercial pollinators.\nBees play an important role in pollinating flowering plants, and are the major type of pollinator in many ecosystems that contain flowering plants. It is estimated that one third of the human food supply depends on pollination by insects, birds and bats, most of which is accomplished by bees, whether wild or domesticated. Over the last half century, there has been a general decline in the species richness of wild bees and other pollinators, probably attributable to stress from increased parasites and disease, the use of pesticides, and a general decrease in the number of wild flowers. Climate change probably exacerbates the problem.\nContract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries. After the introduction of Varroa mites, feral honey bees declined dramatically in the US, though their numbers have since recovered. The number of colonies kept by beekeepers declined slightly, through urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and \"Varroa\" mites, and the closure of beekeeping businesses. In 2006 and 2007 the rate of attrition increased, and was described as colony collapse disorder. In 2010 invertebrate iridescent virus and the fungus \"Nosema ceranae\" were shown to be in every killed colony, and deadly in combination. Winter losses increased to about 1/3. \"Varroa\" mites were thought to be responsible for about half the losses.\nApart from colony collapse disorder, losses outside the US have been attributed to causes including pesticide seed dressings, using neonicotinoids such as Clothianidin, Imidacloprid and Thiamethoxam. From 2013 the European Union restricted some pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further. In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming. In 2018 the European Union decided to ban field use of all three major neonicotinoids; they remain permitted in veterinary, greenhouse, and vehicle transport usage.\nFarmers have focused on alternative solutions to mitigate these problems. By raising native plants, they provide food for native bee pollinators like \"Lasioglossum vierecki\" and \"L. leucozonium\", leading to less reliance on honey bee populations.\nAs food producers.\nHoney is a natural product produced by bees and stored for their own use, but its sweetness has always appealed to humans. Before domestication of bees was even attempted, humans were raiding their nests for their honey. Smoke was often used to subdue the bees and such activities are depicted in rock paintings in Spain dated to 15,000 BC.\nHoney bees are used commercially to produce honey. They also produce some substances used as dietary supplements with possible health benefits, pollen, propolis, and royal jelly, though all of these can also cause allergic reactions.\nAs food.\nBees are considered edible insects. People in some countries eat insects, including the larvae and pupae of bees, mostly stingless species. They also gather larvae, pupae and surrounding cells, known as bee brood, for consumption. In the Indonesian dish \"botok tawon\" from Central and East Java, bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut, wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.\nBee brood (pupae and larvae) although low in calcium, has been found to be high in protein and carbohydrate, and a useful source of phosphorus, magnesium, potassium, and trace minerals iron, zinc, copper, and selenium. In addition, while bee brood was high in fat, it contained no fat soluble vitamins (such as A, D, and E) but it was a good source of most of the water-soluble B-vitamins including choline as well as vitamin C. The fat was composed mostly of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids with 2.0% being polyunsaturated fatty acids.\nAs alternative medicine.\nApitherapy is a branch of alternative medicine that uses honey bee products, including raw honey, royal jelly, pollen, propolis, beeswax and apitoxin (Bee venom). The claim that apitherapy treats cancer, which some proponents of apitherapy make, remains unsupported by evidence-based medicine.\nStings.\nThe painful stings of bees are mostly associated with the poison gland and the Dufour's gland which are abdominal exocrine glands containing various chemicals. In \"Lasioglossum leucozonium\", the Dufour's Gland mostly contains octadecanolide as well as some eicosanolide. There is also evidence of n-triscosane, n-heptacosane, and 22-docosanolide. However, the secretions of these glands could also be used for nest construction."}
{"id": "4655", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4655", "title": "Buendnis 90 - Die Gruenen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4656", "revid": "258000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4656", "title": "Shogunate", "text": ""}
{"id": "4657", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4657", "title": "Binding arbitration", "text": ""}
{"id": "4660", "revid": "32762897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4660", "title": "Basques", "text": "The Basques ( or ; ; ; ) are a Southern European ethnic group, characterised by the Basque language, a common culture and shared genetic ancestry to the ancient Vascones and Aquitanians. Basques are indigenous to and primarily inhabit an area traditionally known as the Basque Country (), a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.\nEtymology of the word \"Basque\".\nThe English word \"Basque\" may be pronounced or and derives from the French \"Basque\" (), which is derived from Gascon \"Basco\" (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish \"Vasco \"(pronounced ). These, in turn, come from Latin \"Vasc\u014d\" (pronounced ; plural \"Vasc\u014dnes\"\u2014see history section below). The Latin generally evolved into the bilabials and in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and its relation Aquitanian (the Latin /w/ instead evolved into in French, Italian and other Romance languages).\nSeveral coins from the 2nd and 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription \"barscunes\". The place where they were minted is not certain, but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the \"Vascones\". Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on \"bhar-s-\", meaning \"summit\", \"point\" or \"leaves\", according to which \"barscunes\" may have meant \"the mountain people\", \"the tall ones\" or \"the proud ones\", while others have posited a relationship to a proto-Indo-European root \"*bar-\" meaning \"border\", \"frontier\", \"march\".\nIn Basque, people call themselves the \"euskaldunak\", singular \"euskaldun\", formed from \"euskal-\" (i.e. \"Basque (language)\") and \"-dun\" (i.e. \"one who has\"); \"euskaldun\" literally means a Basque speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore, the neologism \"euskotar\", plural \"euskotarrak\", was coined in the 19th century to mean a culturally Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not. Alfonso Irigoyen posits that the word \"euskara\" is derived from an ancient Basque verb \"enautsi\" \"to say\" (cf. modern Basque \"esan\") and the suffix \"-(k)ara\" (\"way (of doing something)\"). Thus \"euskara\" would literally mean \"way of saying\", \"way of speaking\". One item of evidence in favour of this hypothesis is found in the Spanish book \"Compendio Historial\", written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as \"enusquera\". It may, however, be a writing mistake.\nIn the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root \"euzko\" which, he thought, came from \"eguzkiko\" (\"of the sun\", related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of this putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana's neologism \"Euzkadi\" (in the regularized spelling Euskadi) is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish, since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.\nOrigin.\nEarly anthropological and genetical studies from the beginning and end of the 20th century theorized that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons. Although they are genetically distinctive in some ways due to isolation, the Basques are still very typically European in terms of their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in terms of some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the Western half of Europe, especially along the Western fringe of the continent. The distinctiveness noted by studies of 'classical' genetic markers (such as blood groups) and the apparently \"pre-Indo-European\" nature of the Basque language has resulted in a popular and long-held misleading view that Basques are \"living fossils\" of the earliest modern humans who colonized Europe.\nHowever, studies of the Y-DNA haplogroups found that on their direct male lineages, the vast majority of modern Basques have a common ancestry with other Western Europeans, namely a marked predominance of Indo-European Haplogroup R1b-DF27 (70%). Although also initially theorised to be that a Palaeolithic marker, this theory encountered inconsistencies even prior to most recent chronological re-evaluations, as more recent studies instead conclude that R1b spread up to Western Europe from southwestern Eurasia in the Neolithic period or later, between 4,000 and 8,000 years ago. The age of subclade which Basque carry, R1b-DF27, \"is estimated at ~4,200 years ago, at the transition between the Neolithic and the Bronze Age, when the Y chromosome landscape of Western Europe was thoroughly remodeled. In spite of its high frequency in Basques, Y-STR internal diversity of R1b-DF27 is lower there, and results in more recent age estimates\", implying it was brought to the region from elsewhere. Several ancient DNA samples have been recovered and amplified from the Iberian and Basque region. The collection of mtDNA and Y-DNA haplogroups sampled there differed significantly compared to their modern frequencies. The authors concluded that there is \"discontinuity\" between ancient locals and modern Basques. Thus, while Basques harbour some very archaic mtDNA lineages, they are not of \"undiluted Palaeolithic ancestry\" but of significantly early Neolithic origin with a connection to the isolate Sardinian people. Rather, some 4500 years ago almost all Y-DNA heritage from Iberian admixture of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers and Neolithic farmers was replaced by the lineage of Indo-European herders from the steppe, and the Basque genetic distinctiveness is a result of centuries of low population size, genetic drift, and endogamy.\nAutosomal genetic studies have confirmed that Basques share close genetic ties to other Europeans, especially with Spaniards, who have a common genetic identity of over 70% with Basques, a homogeneity amongst both their Spanish and French populations, according to high-density SNP genotyping study done in May 2010, and a genomic distinctiveness, relative to other European populations. In 2015, a new scientific study of Basque DNA was published which seems to indicate that Basques are descendants of Neolithic farmers who mixed with local Mesolithic hunters before becoming genetically isolated from the rest of Europe for millennia. Mattias Jakobsson from Uppsala University in Sweden analysed genetic material from eight Stone Age human skeletons found in El Portal\u00f3n Cavern in Atapuerca, northern Spain. These individuals lived between 3,500 and 5,500 years ago, after the transition to farming in southwest Europe. The results show that these early Iberian farmers are the closest ancestors to present-day Basques. The findings were published in \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" of the United States. According to the study, the \"results show that the Basques trace their ancestry to early farming groups from Iberia, which contradicts previous views of them being a remnant population that trace their ancestry to Mesolithic hunter-gatherer groups.\" These early Neolithic farmer ancestors of the Basques, however, additionally mixed with local southwestern hunter-gatherers, and \"the proportion of hunter gatherer-related admixture into early farmers also increased over the course of two millennia.\" This admixed group was also found to be ancestral to other modern-day Iberian peoples, but while the Basques remained relatively isolated for millennia after this time, later migrations into Iberia led to distinct and additional admixture in all other Iberian groups. In 2019, a study was published in \"Science\" in which a more fine-tuned and deep time-transect of Iberian ancient populations including the Basque were analyzed. From their abstract, it says: \"and we reveal that present-day Basques are best described as a typical Iron Age population without the admixture events that later affected the rest of Iberia.\" This indicates Basques were isolated from admixture with outside groups since at least 1000BC or 3000 years before the present. In Iberia, these later admixture (interbreeding) events were with central European (Celtic), eastern Mediterranean and northern African populations, and genomic ancestry from them are found in all or most present-day Iberian populations, except for the Basque.\nHistory.\nBasque tribes were mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, the Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).\nIn the Early Middle Ages the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined ethnic area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Arab rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north. By the turn of the first millennium, the territory of Vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions, such as Soule and Labourd, while south of the Pyrenees the Castile, Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagor\u00e7a (later Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars emerged as the main regional entities with Basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries.\nThe Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subject to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by conquering key western territories (1199\u20131201), leaving the kingdom landlocked. The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512\u20131524). However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.\nNevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839, 1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants. On either side of the Pyrenees, the Basques lost their native institutions and laws held during the \"Ancien r\u00e9gime\". Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence. Labourd, Lower Navarre, and Soule were integrated into the French department system (starting 1790), with Basque efforts to establish a region-specific political-administrative entity failing to take off to date. However, in January 2017, a single agglomeration community was established for the Basque Country in France.\nGeography.\nPolitical and administrative divisions.\nThe Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and the cantons of Maul\u00e9on-Licharre and Tardets-Sorholus in the \"d\u00e9partement\" of Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es Atlantiques, France.\nThe autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as \"Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa\" or EAE in Basque and as \"Comunidad Aut\u00f3noma Vasca\" or CAV in Spanish (in English: \"Basque Autonomous Community\" or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of \u00c1lava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are \"Araba\", \"Bizkaia\" and \"Gipuzkoa\", and their Spanish names are \"\u00c1lava\", \"Vizcaya\" and \"Guip\u00fazcoa\".\nThe BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as \"the Basque Country\" (or \"Euskadi\") by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as \"the three provinces\", up to 1978 referred to as \"Provincias Vascongadas\" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as \"the Basque Government\" for \"the government of the BAC\" are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term \"Pays Basque\" (\"Basque Country\"), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country (\"Euskal Herria\" in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or \"French\") Basque Country specifically.\nUnder Spain's present constitution, Navarre (\"Nafarroa\" in present-day Basque, \"Navarra\" historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque \"Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa\", in Spanish \"Comunidad Foral de Navarra\" (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. Note that in historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) \"Nafarroa\", while the term \"High Navarre\" (\"Nafarroa Garaia\" in Basque, \"Alta Navarra\" in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.\nThere are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (\"Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea\" and \"Zuberoa\" in Basque; \"Labourd, Basse-Navarre\" and \"Soule\" in French), devoid of official status within France's present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives have waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque d\u00e9partement, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.\nPopulation, main cities and languages.\nThere are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebasti\u00e1n (in Gipuzkoa) and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in \u00c1lava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right under the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco's dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favorable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.\nNavarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques' historical capital, is Pamplona (\"Iru\u00f1ea\" in modern Basque). Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.\nAbout a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as \"Iparralde\" (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as \"Hegoalde\" (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are \"Baiona\", \"Angelu\" and \"Miarritze\"). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French. The French Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region. Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.\nBasque diaspora.\nLarge numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basques abroad were often employed in shepherding and ranching and by maritime fisheries and merchants. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States; Canada, mainly in the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec), Latin America (in all 23 countries), South Africa, and Australia.\nMiguel de Unamuno said: \"There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile.\" Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 48 percent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th centuries were Basque. Estimates range between 2.5 - 5\u00a0million Basque descendants live in Chile; the Basque have been a major if not the strongest influence in the country's cultural and economic development.\nBasque place names are to be found, such as Nueva Vizcaya (now Chihuahua and Durango, Mexico), Biscayne Bay (United States), and Aguereberry Point (United States). Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango.\nIn Mexico most Basques are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, Tamaulipas, Coahuila, and Sonora. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.\nIn Colombia, Basques settled mainly in Antioquia and the Coffee Axis. It is estimated that nearly 2,500,000 persons from all Antioquia (40% of this department) have Basque ancestry, as well, in the 19th century about 10% of Colombia's total population were Basque descendants. Antioquia has one of the biggest concentrations of Basques descendants around the world. In 1955, Joaqu\u00edn Ospina said: \"Is there something more similar to the Basque people than the \"\"antioque\u00f1os\". Also, writer Arturo Escobar Uribe said in his book \"Mitos de Antioquia\"\" (Myths of Antioquia) (1950): \"Antioquia, which in its clean ascendance predominates the peninsular farmer of the Basque provinces, inherited the virtues of its ancestors... Despite the predominance of the white race, its extension in the mountains... has projected over Colombia's map the prototype of its race; in Medell\u00edn with the industrial paisa, entrepreneur, strong and steady... in its towns, the adventurer, arrogant, world-explorer... Its myths, which are an evidence of their deep credulity and an indubitable proof of their Iberian ancestor, are the sequel of the conqueror's blood which runs through their veins...\". Bambuco, a Colombian folk music, has Basque roots.\nThe largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada, sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.\nTexas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico's north-eastern \"frontera\", including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic \"hidalgos\", or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.\nCalifornia has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city has several Basque restaurants, including Noriega's which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America's Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as \"Californios\".\nBasques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nThe identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or \"Euskara\", spoken today by 25%-30% of the region's population. An idea of the central place the language has in cultural terms is given by the fact that Basques identify themselves by the term \"euskaldun\" and their country as \"Euskal Herria\", literally \"Basque speaker\" and \"Country of the Basque Language\" respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this increasingly vibrant minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not only exist in isolation. For many Basques, it is juxtaposed with a sense of either Spanish or French identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques, especially in the French Basque Country. Regarding the Spanish Basque Country, Basques that don't have a sense of Spanish identity make up an important part of the population. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both. . . . I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.\nAs a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), and Spanish or French is also the first language of many Basques, all of which maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.\nThe Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate in contrast with other European languages, almost all of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has been spoken continuously \"in situ\", in and around its present territorial location, for longer than other modern European languages, which were all introduced in historic or prehistoric times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.\nHowever, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as \"the oldest language in Europe\" and \"unique among the world's languages\" may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the \"outlandish\" character of Basque. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.\nLand and inheritance.\nBasques have a close attachment to their home (\"etxe(a)\" 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or \"baserri(a)\". Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old \"baserri\" or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide even those Basques whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: \"Bengoetxea\" \"the house of further down\", \"Goikoetxea\" \"the house above\", \"Landaburu\" \"top of the field\", \"Errekondo\" \"next to the stream\", \"Elizalde\" \"by the church\", \"Mendizabal\" \"wide hill\", \"Usetxe\" \"house of birds\" \"Ibarretxe\" \"house in the valley\", \"Etxeberria\" \"the new house\", and so on.\nIn contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the \"fueros,\" favoured survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually were inherited by the eldest male or female child. As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family: wealthy Basque families tended to provide for all children in some way, while less-affluent families may have had only one asset to provide to one child. However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family (unlike in England, with strict primogeniture, where the eldest son inherited everything and often did not provide for others). Even though they were provided for in some way, younger siblings had to make much of their living by other means. Mostly after the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco V\u00e1squez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.\nA widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.\nCuisine.\nBasque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and the excellent produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called \"txoko\" in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.\nCultural production.\nAt the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically led by large increases in the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades ago the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.\nReligion.\nTraditionally Basques have been mostly Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garico\u00efts. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Ferm\u00edn Lasu\u00e9n was born in Vitoria. Lasu\u00e9n was the successor to Franciscan Padre Jun\u00edpero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.\nA sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, a devout Huguenot, commissioned the translation of the New Testament into Basque and B\u00e9arnese for the benefit of her subjects. By the time Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism in order to become king of France, Protestantism virtually disappeared from the Basque community.\nBayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512\u201321.\nNowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious.\nCatholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Basque Country. In 2019, the proportion of Basques that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 60%, while it is one of the most secularized communities of Spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of Basques were atheist.\nPre-Christian religion and mythology.\nChristianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are, broadly speaking, two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in \u00c1lava, one in Navarre) that were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived \"early\".\nPre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name, which would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as \"Anbotoko Mari\" who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she travelled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Alo\u00f1a, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, \"Mari Urraca\" possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name Mar\u00eda or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative. At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshipped Christian icons in Basque territories.\nMari's consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seems to bear the superior ethical power and the power of creation and destruction. It's said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at Mount Txindoki.\nLegends also speak of many and abundant genies, like \"jentilak\" (equivalent to giants), \"lamiak\" (equivalent to nymphs), \"mairuak\" (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), \"iratxoak\" (imps), \"sorginak\" (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. This character is probably an anthropomorphism of the bear. There is a trickster named \"San Martin Txiki\" (\"St Martin the Lesser\").\nIt is unclear whether neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving also as border markers.\nThe \"jentilak\" ('Giants'), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the \"ferrons\", or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as \"Jentilbaratza\".\nSociety.\nHistorically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later European societal norms.\nStrabo's account of the north of Spain in his \"Geographica\" (written between approximately 20 BC and 20 AD) makes a mention of \"a sort of woman-rule\u2014not at all a mark of civilization\" (Hadington 1992), a first mention of the\u2014for the period\u2014unusual position of women. \"Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches. The evidence for this assertion is rather sparse however.\nThis preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:\n...matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly \u2018the mistress of the house', hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage.\nWhile women continued to have a higher position in Basque than other western European societies, it is highly unlikely that any point the society was 'matriarchal', as is often falsely claimed about pre-Indo-European peoples in general. The 'Basque matriarchy' argument is typically tied to 20th century nationalism and is at odds with earlier accounts of the society.\nAlthough the kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the \"juntas\" and \"Juntas Generales\" (such as the \"Juntas Generales de Vizcaya\" or \"Guip\u00fazcoa\") which administered much larger areas. Another example was the fact that in the medieval period most land was owned by the farmers, not the Church or a king.\nSports in the Basque Country.\nPelota.\nThe great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: \"pelota\"). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.\nRural sports.\nThere are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:\nBull runs and bullock games.\nThe encierro (bull run) in Pamplona's fiestas \"Sanfermines\" started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.\nFootball.\nThere are several clubs within the Basque Country, such as Athletic Bilbao, Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alav\u00e9s, SD Eibar and, as Navarre club, the CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name \u2014 \"osasuna\" means \"health\"). In the 2016\u201317 season these five clubs played together in La Liga, the first instance where five Basque clubs have reached that level at the same time. Athletic's recruitment policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players, with \"Basque\" currently defined to include either ethnic Basques or players of any ethnicity trained by a Basque club. Real Sociedad also previously employed such a policy.\nBasketball.\nThe Basque Country also features several professional basketball teams, the most notable of which is Saski Baskonia from Vitoria-Gasteiz, one of the 11 clubs that own stakes in Euroleague Basketball, the company that operates the continent-wide EuroLeague and EuroCup. They are currently joined in the Spanish top flight, Liga ACB, by Bilbao Basket, with the two clubs involved in a longstanding rivalry. Another club from the Basque Country, Gipuzkoa Basket from Donostia, currently plays in the second-level LEB Oro.\nRugby union.\nRugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Champions Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.\nProfessional cycling.\nCycling is popular and the professional cycling team, partly sponsored by the Basque Government participated in the UCI World Tour division until 2014. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans were famous for lining the famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.\nEach April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside. Miguel Indurain, born in Villava is one of the most celebrated cyclists in the world having won 5 consecutive Tours de France.\nPolitics.\nWhile there is no independent Basque state, Spain's autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of \u00c1lava (Araba), Biscay (Bizkaia) and Gipuzkoa, is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the wide autonomy claim of its population.\nNavarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the \"Amejoramiento\", an 'upgrade' of its previous status during dictatorship). It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters). Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.\nThe French Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es Atlantiques, centered in B\u00e9arn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63.87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.\nPolitical conflicts.\nLanguage.\nBoth the Spanish and French governments have, at times, suppressed Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War: cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Catholic Church.\nToday, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.\nIn Navarre, Basque has been declared an endangered language, since the anti-Basque and conservative government of Navarrese People's Union opposes the symbols of Basque culture, highlighting a Spanish identity for Navarre.\nBasque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.\nPolitical status and violence.\nSince its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006.\nSince self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of December 6 of that year. However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spanish (87%). The autonomous regime for the Basque Country was approved in a 1979 referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (\"Amejoramiento del Fuero\": \"improvement of the charter\") was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).\nClassification.\nAs with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques identify themselves as Basques only whereas others identify themselves both as Basque and Spanish. Many Basques regard the designation as a \"cultural minority\" as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation, the commonly accepted designation for the Basque people up to the rise of the nation-states and the definition imposed by the 1812 Spanish Constitution.\nIn modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.\nThe strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.\nNotable Basques.\nAmong the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebasti\u00e1n Elcano (led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus. Don Diego Mar\u00eda de Gardoqui y Arriquibar (1735\u20131798) was Spain's first Ambassador to the United States. Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century. Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J., (1901-1952), a Jesuit priest who founded the charitable housing system Hogar de Cristo, meaning hearth, or home, of Christ, in Chile. El Hogar provided a home-like milieu for the homeless. He also founded the Chilean Trade Union Association to promote a union movement based on the social teachings of the Catholic Church. He was a friend and savior to all the poor and homeless. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II on October 16, 1994, and canonized by Pope Benedict XVI on October 23, 2005."}
{"id": "4661", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4661", "title": "Blot", "text": "Blot may refer to:"}
{"id": "4662", "revid": "16075528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4662", "title": "Bookkeeping", "text": "Bookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions, and is part of the process of accounting in business and other organisations. It involves preparing source documents for all transactions, operations, and other events of a business. Transactions include purchases, sales, receipts and payments by an individual person or an organization/corporation. There are several standard methods of bookkeeping, including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. While these may be viewed as \"real\" bookkeeping, any process for recording financial transactions is a bookkeeping process.\nThe person in an organisation who is employed to perform bookkeeping functions is usually called the bookkeeper (or book-keeper). They usually write the \"daybooks\" (which contain records of sales, purchases, receipts, and payments), and document each financial transaction, whether cash or credit, into the correct daybook\u2014that is, petty cash book, suppliers ledger, customer ledger, etc.\u2014and the general ledger. Thereafter, an accountant can create financial reports from the information recorded by the bookkeeper. The bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage, from which an accountant may prepare financial reports for the organisation, such as the income statement and balance sheet.\nHistory.\nThe origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity, but recent researches indicate that methods of keeping accounts have existed from the remotest times of human life in cities. Babylonian records written with styli on small slabs of clay have been found dating to 2600 BCE. \nThe term \"waste book\" was used in colonial America, referring to the documenting of daily transactions of receipts and expenditures. Records were made in chronological order, and for temporary use only. Daily records were then transferred to a daybook or account ledger to balance the accounts and to create a permanent journal; then the waste book could be discarded, hence the name.\nProcess.\nThe primary purpose of bookkeeping is to record the \"financial effects\" of transactions. An important difference between a manual and an electronic accounting system is the former's latency between the recording of a financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. This delay, which is absent in electronic accounting systems due to nearly instantaneous posting to relevant accounts, is characteristic of manual systems, and gave rise to the primary books of accounts\u2014cash book, purchase book, sales book, etc.\u2014for immediately documenting a financial transaction.\nIn the normal course of business, a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. Sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. Deposit slips are produced when lodgements (deposits) are made to a bank account. Checks (spelled \"cheques\" in the UK and several other countries) are written to pay money out of the account. Bookkeeping first involves recording the details of all of these \"source documents\" into multi-column \"journals\" (also known as \"books of first entry\" or \"daybooks\"). For example, all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal; all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. Each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. In the single entry system, each transaction is recorded only once. Most individuals who balance their check-book each month are using such a system, and most personal-finance software follows this approach.\nAfter a certain period, typically a month, each column in each journal is totalled to give a summary for that period. Using the rules of double-entry, these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger, or \"account book\". For example, the entries in the Sales Journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer's account (showing that the customer now owes us money), and a credit entry might be made in the account for \"Sale of class 2 widgets\" (showing that this activity has generated revenue for us). This process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called \"posting\". Once the posting process is complete, accounts kept using the \"T\" format undergo \"balancing\", which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account.\nAs a partial check that the posting process was done correctly, a working document called an \"unadjusted trial balance\" is created. In its simplest form, this is a three-column list. Column One contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. If an account has a \"debit\" balance, the balance amount is copied into Column Two (the \"debit column\"); if an account has a \"credit\" balance, the amount is copied into Column Three (the \"credit column\"). The debit column is then totalled, and then the credit column is totalled. The two totals must agree\u2014which is not by chance\u2014because under the double-entry rules, whenever there is a posting, the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. If the two totals do not agree, an error has been made, either in the journals or during the posting process. The error must be located and rectified, and the totals of the debit column and the credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place.\nOnce the accounts balance, the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. These adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule: for example, the \"inventory\" account and asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stocktake. At the same time, the \"expense\" account associated with usage of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. Other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. This results in a listing called the \"adjusted trial balance\". It is the accounts in this list, and their corresponding debit or credit balances, that are used to prepare the financial statements.\nFinally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance, which may include:\nSingle-entry system.\nThe primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the \"cash book\", which is similar to a checking account register (in UK: cheque account, current account), except all entries are allocated among several categories of income and expense accounts. Separate account records are maintained for petty cash, accounts payable and receivable, and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. To save time and avoid the errors of manual calculations, single-entry bookkeeping can be done today with do-it-yourself bookkeeping software.\nDouble-entry system.\nA \"double-entry bookkeeping system\" is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different nominal ledger accounts.\nDaybooks.\nA \"daybook\" is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions; it is also called a \"book of original entry\". The daybook's details must be transcribed formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. Daybooks include:\nPetty cash book.\nA \"petty cash\" book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts; it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. This type of cash book usually uses the imprest system: a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. This money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality, minor stationery, casual postage, and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.\nAnd also the balance of petty cash book is Asset.\nJournals.\n\"Journals\" are recorded in the general journal daybook. A journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. A company can maintain one journal for all transactions, or keep several journals based on similar activity (e.g., sales, cash receipts, revenue, etc.), making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. For every debit journal entry recorded, there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation.\nLedgers.\nA \"ledger\" is a record of accounts. The ledger is a permanent summary of all amounts entered in supporting Journals which list individual transactions by date. These accounts are recorded separately, showing their beginning/ending balance. A journal lists financial transactions in chronological order, without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be charged in each account. A ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding account for every transaction listed. The ledger also sums up the total of every account, which is transferred into the balance sheet and the income statement. There are three different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping:\nChart of accounts.\nA chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric, alphabetical, or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. The equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. Possibilities include \"sole trader\", \"partnership\", \"trust\", and \"company\".\nComputerized bookkeeping.\nComputerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper \"books\" that are used to record the financial transactions of a business entity; instead, relational databases are used today, but typically, these still enforce the norms of bookkeeping including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. CPAs supervise the internal controls for computerized bookkeeping systems, which serve to minimize errors in documenting the numerous activities a business entity may initiate or complete over an accounting period.\nExternal links.\nhttps://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09585209500000049?journalCode=rabf20"}
{"id": "4663", "revid": "5094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4663", "title": "Basil the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "4664", "revid": "145668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4664", "title": "B\u00e9zier curve", "text": "A B\u00e9zier curve ( ) is a parametric curve used in computer graphics and related fields. The curve, which is related to the Bernstein polynomial, is named after Pierre B\u00e9zier, who used it in the 1960s for designing curves for the bodywork of Renault cars. Other uses include the design of computer fonts and animation. B\u00e9zier curves can be combined to form a B\u00e9zier spline, or generalized to higher dimensions to form B\u00e9zier surfaces. The B\u00e9zier triangle is a special case of the latter.\nIn vector graphics, B\u00e9zier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely. \"Paths\", as they are commonly referred to in image manipulation programs, are combinations of linked B\u00e9zier curves. Paths are not bound by the limits of rasterized images and are intuitive to modify.\nB\u00e9zier curves are also used in the time domain, particularly in animation, user interface design and smoothing cursor trajectory in eye gaze controlled interfaces. For example, a B\u00e9zier curve can be used to specify the velocity over time of an object such as an icon moving from A to B, rather than simply moving at a fixed number of pixels per step. When animators or interface designers talk about the \"physics\" or \"feel\" of an operation, they may be referring to the particular B\u00e9zier curve used to control the velocity over time of the move in question.\nThis also applies to robotics where the motion of a welding arm, for example, should be smooth to avoid unnecessary wear.\nInvention.\nThe mathematical basis for B\u00e9zier curves\u2014the Bernstein polynomials\u2014was established in 1912, but the polynomials were not applied to graphics until some 50 years later when mathematician Paul de Casteljau in 1959 developed de Casteljau's algorithm, a numerically stable method for evaluating the curves, and became the first to apply them to computer-aided design at French automaker Citro\u00ebn. The polynomials were widely publicised in the 1960s by the French engineer Pierre B\u00e9zier, who used them to design automobile bodies at Renault.\nSpecific cases.\nA B\u00e9zier curve is defined by a set of \"control points\" P0 through P\"n\", where \"n\" is called its order (\"n\" = 1 for linear, 2 for quadratic, etc.). The first and last control points are always the end points of the curve; however, the intermediate control points (if any) generally do not lie on the curve. The sums in the following sections are to be understood as affine combinations; the coefficients sum to 1.\nLinear B\u00e9zier curves.\nGiven distinct points P0 and P1, a linear B\u00e9zier curve is simply a straight line between those two points. The curve is given by\nand is equivalent to linear interpolation.\nQuadratic B\u00e9zier curves.\nA quadratic B\u00e9zier curve is the path traced by the function B(\"t\"), given points P0, P1, and P2,\nwhich can be interpreted as the linear interpolant of corresponding points on the linear B\u00e9zier curves from P0 to P1 and from P1 to P2 respectively. Rearranging the preceding equation yields:\nThis can be written in a way that highlights the symmetry with respect to P1:\nWhich immediately gives the derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\":\nfrom which it can be concluded that the tangents to the curve at P0 and P2 intersect at P1. As \"t\" increases from 0 to 1, the curve departs from P0 in the direction of P1, then bends to arrive at P2 from the direction of P1.\nThe second derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\nCubic B\u00e9zier curves.\nFour points P0, P1, P2 and P3 in the plane or in higher-dimensional space define a cubic B\u00e9zier curve.\nThe curve starts at P0 going toward P1 and arrives at P3 coming from the direction of P2. Usually, it will not pass through P1 or P2; these points are only there to provide directional information. The distance between P1 and P2 determines \"how far\" and \"how fast\" the curve moves towards P1 before turning towards P2.\nWriting BPi,Pj,Pk(\"t\") for the quadratic B\u00e9zier curve defined by points Pi, Pj, and Pk, the cubic B\u00e9zier curve can be defined as an affine combination of two quadratic B\u00e9zier curves:\nThe explicit form of the curve is:\nFor some choices of P1 and P2 the curve may intersect itself, or contain a cusp.\nAny series of 4 distinct points can be converted to a cubic B\u00e9zier curve that goes through all 4 points in order.\nGiven the starting and ending point of some cubic B\u00e9zier curve, and the points along the curve corresponding to \"t\" = 1/3 and \"t\" = 2/3, the control points for the original B\u00e9zier curve can be recovered.\nThe derivative of the cubic B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\nThe second derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\nGeneral definition.\nB\u00e9zier curves can be defined for any degree \"n\".\nRecursive definition.\nA recursive definition for the B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\" expresses it as a point-to-point linear combination (linear interpolation) of a pair of corresponding points in two B\u00e9zier curves of degree \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nLet formula_11 denote the B\u00e9zier curve determined by any selection of points P0, P1,\u00a0...,\u00a0P\"n\". Then to start,\nThis recursion is elucidated in the animations below.\nExplicit definition.\nThe formula can be expressed explicitly as follows:\nwhere formula_15 are the binomial coefficients.\nFor example, for \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a05:\nTerminology.\nSome terminology is associated with these parametric curves. We have\nwhere the polynomials\nare known as Bernstein basis polynomials of degree \"n\".\nNote that \"t\"0\u00a0=\u00a01, (1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"t\")0\u00a0=\u00a01, and that the binomial coefficient, formula_15, is:\nThe points P\"i\" are called \"control points\" for the B\u00e9zier curve. The polygon formed by connecting the B\u00e9zier points with lines, starting with P0 and finishing with P\"n\", is called the \"B\u00e9zier polygon\" (or \"control polygon\"). The convex hull of the B\u00e9zier polygon contains the B\u00e9zier curve.\nPolynomial form.\nSometimes it is desirable to express the B\u00e9zier curve as a polynomial instead of a sum of less straightforward Bernstein polynomials. Application of the binomial theorem to the definition of the curve followed by some rearrangement will yield:\nwhere\nThis could be practical if formula_23 can be computed prior to many evaluations of formula_24; however one should use caution as high order curves may lack numeric stability (de Casteljau's algorithm should be used if this occurs). Note that the empty product is 1.\nSecond-order curve is a parabolic segment.\nA quadratic B\u00e9zier curve is also a segment of a parabola. As a parabola is a conic section, some sources refer to quadratic B\u00e9ziers as \"conic arcs\". With reference to the figure on the right, the important features of the parabola can be derived as follows:\nDerivative.\nThe derivative for a curve of order \"n\" is\nConstructing B\u00e9zier curves.\nLinear curves.\nThe \"t\" in the function for a linear B\u00e9zier curve can be thought of as describing how far B(\"t\") is from P0 to P1. For example, when \"t=0.25\", B(\"t\") is one quarter of the way from point P0 to P1. As \"t\" varies from 0 to 1, B(\"t\") describes a straight line from P0 to P1.\nQuadratic curves.\nFor quadratic B\u00e9zier curves one can construct intermediate points Q0 and Q1 such that as \"t\" varies from 0 to 1:\nHigher-order curves.\nFor higher-order curves one needs correspondingly more intermediate points. For cubic curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, and Q2 that describe linear B\u00e9zier curves, and points R0 &amp; R1 that describe quadratic B\u00e9zier curves:\nFor fourth-order curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, Q2 &amp; Q3 that describe linear B\u00e9zier curves, points R0, R1 &amp; R2 that describe quadratic B\u00e9zier curves, and points S0 &amp; S1 that describe cubic B\u00e9zier curves:\nFor fifth-order curves, one can construct similar intermediate points.\nThese representations rest on the process used in De Casteljau's algorithm to calculate B\u00e9zier curves.\nOffsets (a.k.a. stroking) of B\u00e9zier curves.\nThe curve at a fixed offset from a given B\u00e9zier curve, called an offset or parallel curve in mathematics (lying \"parallel\" to the original curve, like the offset between rails in a railroad track), cannot be exactly formed by a B\u00e9zier curve (except in some trivial cases). In general, the two-sided offset curve of a cubic B\u00e9zier is a 10th-order algebraic curve and more generally for a B\u00e9zier of degree \"n\" the two-sided offset curve is an algebraic curve of degree 4\"n\"-2. However, there are heuristic methods that usually give an adequate approximation for practical purposes.\nIn the field of vector graphics, painting two symmetrically distanced offset curves is called \"stroking\" (the B\u00e9zier curve or in general a path of several B\u00e9zier segments). The conversion from offset curves to filled B\u00e9zier contours is of practical importance in converting fonts defined in Metafont, which allows stroking of B\u00e9zier curves, to the more widely used PostScript type 1 fonts, which only allow (for efficiency purposes) the mathematically simpler operation of filling a contour defined by (non-self-intersecting) B\u00e9zier curves.\nDegree elevation.\nA B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\" can be converted into a B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01 \"with the same shape\". This is useful if software supports B\u00e9zier curves only of specific degree. For example, systems that can only work with cubic B\u00e9zier curves can implicitly work with quadratic curves by using their equivalent cubic representation.\nTo do degree elevation, we use the equality formula_29 Each component formula_30 is multiplied by (1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"t\") and\u00a0\"t\", thus increasing a degree by one, without changing the value. Here is the example of increasing degree from 2 to\u00a03.\nFor arbitrary \"n\" we use equalities\nTherefore:\nintroducing arbitrary formula_34 and formula_35.\nTherefore, new control points are \nRepeated degree elevation.\nThe concept of degree elevation can be repeated on a control polygon R to get a sequence of control polygons R,R1,R2, and so on. After \"r\" degree elevations, the polygon Rr has the vertices P0,r,P1,r,P2,r...,Pn+r,r given by \nIt can also be shown that for the underlying B\u00e9zier curve \"B\",\nRational B\u00e9zier curves.\nThe rational B\u00e9zier curve adds adjustable weights to provide closer approximations to arbitrary shapes. The numerator is a weighted Bernstein-form B\u00e9zier curve and the denominator is a weighted sum of Bernstein polynomials. Rational B\u00e9zier curves can, among other uses, be used to represent segments of conic sections exactly, including circular arcs.\nGiven \"n\" + 1 control points P\"i\", the rational B\u00e9zier curve can be described by:\nor simply\nThe expression can be extended by using number systems besides reals for the weights. In the complex plane the points {1}, {-1}, and {1} with weights {formula_41 }, {1}, and {formula_42} generate a full circle with radius one. For curves with points and weights on a circle, the weights can be scaled without changing the curve's shape. Scaling the central weight of the above curve by 1.35508 gives a more uniform parameterization. \nApplications.\nComputer graphics.\nB\u00e9zier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves. As the curve is completely contained in the convex hull of its control points, the points can be graphically displayed and used to manipulate the curve intuitively. Affine transformations such as translation and rotation can be applied on the curve by applying the respective transform on the control points of the curve.\nQuadratic and cubic B\u00e9zier curves are most common. Higher degree curves are more computationally expensive to evaluate. When more complex shapes are needed, low order B\u00e9zier curves are patched together, producing a composite B\u00e9zier curve. A composite B\u00e9zier curve is commonly referred to as a \"path\" in vector graphics languages (like PostScript), vector graphics standards (like SVG) and vector graphics programs (like Artline, Timeworks Publisher, Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw, Inkscape, and Allegro). In order to join B\u00e9zier curves into a composite B\u00e9zier curve without kinks, a property called \"G1 continuous\", it suffices to force the control point at which two constituent B\u00e9zier curves meet to lie on the line defined by the two control points on either side.\nThe simplest method for scan converting (rasterizing) a B\u00e9zier curve is to evaluate it at many closely spaced points and scan convert the approximating sequence of line segments. However, this does not guarantee that the rasterized output looks sufficiently smooth, because the points may be spaced too far apart. Conversely it may generate too many points in areas where the curve is close to linear. A common adaptive method is recursive subdivision, in which a curve's control points are checked to see if the curve approximates a straight line to within a small tolerance. If not, the curve is subdivided parametrically into two segments, 0 \u2264 \"t\" \u2264 0.5 and 0.5 \u2264 \"t\" \u2264 1, and the same procedure is applied recursively to each half. There are also forward differencing methods, but great care must be taken to analyse error propagation.\nAnalytical methods where a B\u00e9zier is intersected with each scan line involve finding roots of cubic polynomials (for cubic B\u00e9ziers) and dealing with multiple roots, so they are not often used in practice.\nThe rasterisation algorithm used in Metafont is based on discretising the curve, so that it is approximated by a sequence of \"rook moves\" that are purely vertical or purely horizontal, along the pixel boundaries. To that end, the plane is first split into eight 45\u00b0 sectors (by the coordinate axes and the two lines formula_43), then the curve is decomposed into smaller segments such that the \"direction\" of a curve segment stays within one sector; since the curve velocity is a second degree polynomial, finding the formula_44 values where it is parallel to one of these lines can be done by solving quadratic equations. Within each segment, either horizontal or vertical movement dominates, and the total number of steps in either direction can be read off from the endpoint coordinates; in for example the 0\u201345\u00b0 sector horizontal movement to the right dominates, so it only remains to decide between which steps to the right the curve should make a step up.\nThere is also a modified curve form of Bresenham's line drawing algorithm by Zingl that performs this rasterization by subdividing the curve into rational pieces and calculating the error at each pixel location such that it either travels at a 45\u00b0 angle or straight depending on compounding error as it iterates through the curve. This reduces the next step calculation to a series of integer additions and subtractions.\nAnimation.\nIn animation applications, such as Adobe Flash and Synfig, B\u00e9zier curves are used to outline, for example, movement. Users outline the wanted path in B\u00e9zier curves, and the application creates the needed frames for the object to move along the path.\nIn 3D animation, B\u00e9zier curves are often used to define 3D paths as well as 2D curves for keyframe interpolation. B\u00e9zier curves are now very frequently used to control the animation easing in CSS, JavaScript and JavaFx.\nFonts.\nTrueType fonts use composite B\u00e9zier curves composed of quadratic B\u00e9zier curves. Other languages and imaging tools (such as PostScript, Asymptote, Metafont, and SVG) use composite B\u00e9ziers composed of cubic B\u00e9zier curves for drawing curved shapes. OpenType fonts can use either kind, depending on the flavor of the font.\nThe internal rendering of all B\u00e9zier curves in font or vector graphics renderers will split them recursively up to the point where the curve is flat enough to be drawn as a series of linear or circular segments. The exact splitting algorithm is implementation dependent, only the flatness criteria must be respected to reach the necessary precision and to avoid non-monotonic local changes of curvature. The \"smooth curve\" feature of charts in Microsoft Excel also uses this algorithm.\nBecause arcs of circles and ellipses cannot be exactly represented by B\u00e9zier curves, they are first approximated by B\u00e9zier curves, which are in turn approximated by arcs of circles. This is inefficient as there exists also approximations of all B\u00e9zier curves using arcs of circles or ellipses, which can be rendered incrementally with arbitrary precision. Another approach, used by modern hardware graphics adapters with accelerated geometry, can convert exactly all B\u00e9zier and conic curves (or surfaces) into NURBS, that can be rendered incrementally without first splitting the curve recursively to reach the necessary flatness condition. This approach also allows preserving the curve definition under all linear or perspective 2D and 3D transforms and projections.\nFont engines, like FreeType, draw the font's curves (and lines) on a pixellated surface using a process known as font rasterization.\nRobotics.\nB\u00e9zier curves can be used in robotics to produce trajectories of an end-effector due to the virtue of the control polygon\u2019s ability to give a clear indication of whether the path is colliding with any nearby obstacle or object. Furthermore, joint space trajectories can be accurately differentiated using B\u00e9zier curves. Consequently, the derivatives of joint space trajectories are used in the calculation of the dynamics and control effort (torque profiles) of the robotic manipulator."}
{"id": "4665", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4665", "title": "Banach algebra", "text": "In mathematics, especially functional analysis, a Banach algebra, named after Stefan Banach, is an associative algebra \"A\" over the real or complex numbers (or over a non-Archimedean complete normed field) that at the same time is also a Banach space, that is, a normed space that is complete in the metric induced by the norm. The norm is required to satisfy\nThis ensures that the multiplication operation is continuous.\nA Banach algebra is called \"unital\" if it has an identity element for the multiplication whose norm is 1, and \"commutative\" if its multiplication is commutative.\nAny Banach algebra formula_2 (whether it has an identity element or not) can be embedded isometrically into a unital Banach algebra formula_3 so as to form a closed ideal of formula_3. Often one assumes \"a priori\" that the algebra under consideration is unital: for one can develop much of the theory by considering formula_3 and then applying the outcome in the original algebra. However, this is not the case all the time. For example, one cannot define all the trigonometric functions in a Banach algebra without identity.\nThe theory of real Banach algebras can be very different from the theory of complex Banach algebras. For example, the spectrum of an element of a nontrivial complex Banach algebra can never be empty, whereas in a real Banach algebra it could be empty for some elements.\nBanach algebras can also be defined over fields of \"p\"-adic numbers. This is part of \"p\"-adic analysis.\nExamples.\nThe prototypical example of a Banach algebra is formula_6, the space of (complex-valued) continuous functions on a locally compact (Hausdorff) space that vanish at infinity. formula_6 is unital if and only if \"X\" is compact. The complex conjugation being an involution, formula_6 is in fact a C*-algebra. More generally, every C*-algebra is a Banach algebra.\nCounterexamples.\nThe algebra of the quaternions formula_9 is a real Banach algebra, but it is not a complex algebra (and hence not a complex Banach algebra) for the simple reason that the center of the quaternions is the real numbers, which cannot contain a copy of the complex numbers.\nProperties.\nSeveral elementary functions that are defined via power series may be defined in any unital Banach algebra; examples include the exponential function and the trigonometric functions, and more generally any entire function. (In particular, the exponential map can be used to define abstract index groups.) The formula for the geometric series remains valid in general unital Banach algebras. The binomial theorem also holds for two commuting elements of a Banach algebra.\nThe set of invertible elements in any unital Banach algebra is an open set, and the inversion operation on this set is continuous, (and hence is a homeomorphism) so that it forms a topological group under multiplication.\nIf a Banach algebra has unit 1, then 1 cannot be a commutator; i.e., formula_10\u2009 for any \"x\", \"y\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"A\". This is because \"xy\" and \"yx\" have the same spectrum except possibly 0.\nThe various algebras of functions given in the examples above have very different properties from standard examples of algebras such as the reals. For example:\nSpectral theory.\nUnital Banach algebras over the complex field provide a general setting to develop spectral theory. The \"spectrum\" of an element \"x\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"A\", denoted by formula_11, consists of all those complex scalars \"\u03bb\" such that \"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"\u03bb\"1 is not invertible in \"A\". The spectrum of any element \"x\" is a closed subset of the closed disc in C with radius ||\"x\"|| and center 0, and thus is compact. Moreover, the spectrum formula_11 of an element \"x\" is non-empty and satisfies the spectral radius formula:\nGiven \"x\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"A\", the holomorphic functional calculus allows to define \"\u0192\"(\"x\")\u00a0\u2208 \"A\" for any function \"\u0192\" holomorphic in a neighborhood of formula_14 Furthermore, the spectral mapping theorem holds:\nWhen the Banach algebra \"A\" is the algebra L(\"X\") of bounded linear operators on a complex Banach space \"X\"\u2009 (e.g., the algebra of square matrices), the notion of the spectrum in \"A\" coincides with the usual one in operator theory. For \"\u0192\"\u00a0\u2208 \"C\"(\"X\") (with a compact Hausdorff space\u00a0\"X\"), one sees that:\nThe norm of a normal element \"x\" of a C*-algebra coincides with its spectral radius. This generalizes an analogous fact for normal operators.\nLet \"A\"\u2009 be a complex unital Banach algebra in which every non-zero element \"x\" is invertible (a division algebra). For every \"a\"\u00a0\u2208 \"A\", there is \"\u03bb\"\u00a0\u2208 C such that\n\"a\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"\u03bb1 is not invertible (because the spectrum of \"a\" is not empty) hence \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"\u03bb1\u00a0: this algebra \"A\" is naturally isomorphic to C (the complex case of the Gelfand\u2013Mazur theorem).\nIdeals and characters.\nLet \"A\"\u2009 be a unital \"commutative\" Banach algebra over C. Since \"A\" is then a commutative ring with unit, every non-invertible element of \"A\" belongs to some maximal ideal of \"A\". Since a maximal ideal formula_17 in \"A\" is closed, formula_18 is a Banach algebra that is a field, and it follows from the Gelfand\u2013Mazur theorem that there is a bijection between the set of all maximal ideals of \"A\" and the set \u0394(\"A\") of all nonzero homomorphisms from \"A\"\u2009 to C. The set \u0394(\"A\") is called the \"structure space\" or \"character space\" of \"A\", and its members \"characters.\"\nA character \"\u03c7\" is a linear functional on \"A\" that is at the same time multiplicative, \"\u03c7\"(\"ab\") = \"\u03c7\"(\"a\") \"\u03c7\"(\"b\"), and satisfies \"\u03c7\"(1) = 1. Every character is automatically continuous from \"A\"\u2009 to C, since the kernel of a character is a maximal ideal, which is closed. Moreover, the norm (\"i.e.\", operator norm) of a character is one. Equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence on \"A\" (\"i.e.\", the topology induced by the weak-* topology of\u00a0\"A\"\u2217), the character space, \u0394(\"A\"), is a Hausdorff compact space.\nFor any \"x\" \u2208 \"A\",\nwhere formula_20 is the Gelfand representation of \"x\" defined as follows: formula_20 is the continuous function from \u0394(\"A\") to C given by formula_22\u2009 The spectrum of formula_23 in the formula above, is the spectrum as element of the algebra \"C\"(\u0394(\"A\")) of complex continuous functions on the compact space \u0394(\"A\"). Explicitly,\nAs an algebra, a unital commutative Banach algebra is semisimple (i.e., its Jacobson radical is zero) if and only if its Gelfand representation has trivial kernel. An important example of such an algebra is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, when \"A\" is a commutative unital C*-algebra, the Gelfand representation is then an isometric *-isomorphism between \"A\" and \"C\"(\u0394(\"A\")) .\nBanach *-algebras.\nA Banach *-algebra \"A\" is a Banach algebra over the field of complex numbers, together with a map * : \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" that has the following properties:\nIn other words, a Banach *-algebra is a Banach algebra over formula_27 which is also a *-algebra.\nIn most natural examples, one also has that the involution is isometric, that is, \nSome authors include this isometric property in the definition of a Banach *-algebra."}
{"id": "4666", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4666", "title": "B*-algebra", "text": ""}
{"id": "4667", "revid": "41386314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4667", "title": "Boris Pasternak", "text": "Boris Leonidovich Pasternak (; ; 30 May 1960) was a Russian poet, novelist, and literary translator. Composed in 1917, Pasternak's first book of poems, \"My Sister, Life\", was published in Berlin in 1922 and soon became an important collection in the Russian language. Pasternak's translations of stage plays by Goethe, Schiller, Calder\u00f3n de la Barca and Shakespeare remain very popular with Russian audiences.\nPasternak is the author of \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1957), a novel that takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the Second World War. \"Doctor Zhivago\" was rejected for publication in the USSR, but the manuscript was smuggled to Italy for publication. Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1958, an event that enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which forced him to decline the prize, though his descendants were able to accept it in his name in 1989. \"Doctor Zhivago\" has been part of the main Russian school curriculum since 2003.\nEarly life.\nPasternak was born in Moscow on 10 February (Gregorian), 1890 (29 January, Julian) into a wealthy, assimilated Jewish family. His father was the Post-Impressionist painter Leonid Pasternak, professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. His mother was Rosa Kaufman, a concert pianist and the daughter of Odessa industrialist Isadore Kaufman and his wife. Pasternak had a younger brother Alex and sisters Lydia and Josephine. The family claimed to be descended on the paternal line from Isaac Abarbanel, the famous 15th-century Sephardic Jewish philosopher, Bible commentator, and treasurer of Portugal.\nEarly education.\nFrom 1904 to 1907, Boris Pasternak was the cloister-mate of Peter Minchakievich (1890\u20131963) in Holy Dormition Pochayiv Lavra, located in West Ukraine. Minchakievich came from an Orthodox Ukrainian family and Pasternak came from a Jewish family. Some confusion has arisen as to Pasternak attending a military academy in his boyhood years. The uniforms of their monastery Cadet Corp were only similar to those of The Czar Alexander the Third Military Academy, as Pasternak and Minchakievich never attended any military academy. Most schools used a distinctive military looking uniform particular to them as was the custom of the time in Eastern Europe and Russia. Boyhood friends, they parted in 1908, friendly but with different politics, never to see each other again. Pasternak went to the Moscow Conservatory to study music (later Germany to study philosophy), and Minchakievich went to L'viv University (L'vov, L'wow) to study history and philosophy. The good dimension of the character Strelnikov in Dr. Zhivago is based upon Peter Minchakievich. Several of Pasternak's characters are composites. After World War One and the Revolution, fighting for the Provisional or Republican government under Kerensky, and then escaping a Communist jail and execution, Minchakievich trekked across Siberia in 1917 and became an American citizen. Pasternak stayed in Russia.\nIn a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled,\nShortly after his birth, Pasternak's parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement. Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, \"my father illustrated his books, went to see him, revered him, and ...the whole house was imbued with his spirit.\"\nIn a 1956 essay, Pasternak recalled his father's feverish work creating illustrations for Tolstoy's novel \"Resurrection\". The novel was serialized in the journal \"Niva\" by the publisher Fyodor Marx, based in St Petersburg. The sketches were drawn from observations in such places as courtrooms, prisons and on trains, in a spirit of realism. To ensure that the sketches met the journal deadline, train conductors were enlisted to personally collect the illustrations. Pasternak wrote,\nAccording to Max Hayward, \"In November 1910, when Tolstoy fled from his home and died in the stationmaster's house at Astapovo, Leonid Pasternak was informed by telegram and he went there immediately, taking his son Boris with him, and made a drawing of Tolstoy on his deathbed.\"\nRegular visitors to the Pasternaks' home also included Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Lev Shestov, Rainer Maria Rilke. Pasternak aspired first to be a musician. Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory. In 1910 he abruptly left for the German University of Marburg, where he studied under Neo-Kantian philosophers Hermann Cohen, Nicolai Hartmann and Paul Natorp.\nLife and career.\nOlga Freidenberg.\nIn 1910 Pasternak was reunited with his cousin, Olga Freidenberg (1890\u20131955). They had shared the same nursery but had been separated when the Freidenberg family moved to Saint Petersburg. They fell in love immediately but were never lovers. The romance however is made clear from their letters, Pasternak writing:You do not know how my tormenting feeling grew and grew until it became obvious to me and to others. As you walked beside me with complete detachment, I could not express it to you. It was a rare sort of closeness, as if we two, you and I, were in love with something that was utterly indifferent to both of us, something that remained aloof from us by virtue of its extraordinary inability to adapt to the other side of life.The cousins' initial passion developed into a lifelong close friendship. From 1910 Pasternak and Freidenberg exchanged frequent letters, and their correspondence lasted over 40 years until 1954. The cousins last met in 1936.\nIda Wissotzkaya.\nPasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow Jewish , whose company Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world. Pasternak had tutored her in the final class of high school. He helped her prepare for finals. They met in Marburg during the summer of 1912 when Boris' father, Leonid Pasternak, painted her portrait.\nAlthough Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it. He returned to Moscow around the time of the outbreak of the First World War. In the aftermath of events, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida. However, the Wissotzky family was disturbed by Pasternak's poor prospects and persuaded Ida to refuse him. She turned him down and he told of his love and rejection in the poem \"Marburg\" (1917):\n&lt;poem&gt;I quivered. I flared up, and then was extinguished.\nI shook. I had made a proposal\u2014but late,\nToo late. I was scared, and she had refused me.\nI pity her tears, am more blessed than a saint.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAround this time, when he was back in Russia, he joined the Russian Futurist group Centrifuge, also spelt Tsentrifuga, as a pianist; although poetry was just a hobby for him then, it was in their group journal, \"Lirika\", where some of his earliest poems were published. His involvement with the Futurist movement as a whole reached its peak when, in 1914, he published a satirical article in \"Rukonog\", which attacked the jealous leader of the \"Mezzanine of Poetry\", Vadim Shershenevich, who was criticizing \"Lirika\" and the Ego-Futurists because Shershenevich himself was barred from collaborating with Centrifuge, the reason being that he was such a talentless poet. The action eventually caused a verbal battle amongst several members of the groups, fighting for recognition as the first, truest Russian Futurists; these included the Cubo-Futurists, who were by that time already notorious for their scandalous behaviour. Pasternak's first and second books of poetry were published shortly after these events.\nAnother failed love affair in 1917 inspired the poems in his third and first major book, \"My Sister, Life\". His early verse cleverly dissimulates his preoccupation with Immanuel Kant's philosophy. Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German-language Romantic poets.\nDuring World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodovo-Vilve near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for \"Dr. Zhivago\" many years later. Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917. According to Max Hayward,\nWhen it finally was published in 1922, Pasternak's \"My Sister, Life\" revolutionised Russian poetry. It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.\nFollowing \"My Sister, Life\", Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle \"Rupture\" (1921). Both Pro-Soviet writers and their White emigre equivalents applauded Pasternak's poetry as pure, unbridled inspiration.\nIn the late 1920s, he also participated in the much celebrated tripartite correspondence with Rilke and Tsvetayeva. As the 1920s wore on, however, Pasternak increasingly felt that his colourful style was at odds with a less educated readership. He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905. He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably \"The Childhood of Luvers\" and \"Safe Conduct\". (The collection \"Zhenia's Childhood and Other Stories\" would be published in 1982.)\nIn 1922 Pasternak married Evgeniya Lurye (\u0415\u0432\u0433\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f \u041b\u0443\u0440\u044c\u0435), a student at the Art Institute. The following year their son Evgenii was born.\nEvidence of Pasternak's support of still-revolutionary members of the leadership of the Communist Party as late as 1926 is indicated by his poem \"In Memory of Reissner\" presumably written upon the shockingly premature death from typhus of legendary Bolshevik leader Larisa Reisner aged 30 in February of that year.\nBy 1927, Pasternak's close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to, \"break off relations,\" with both of them. Although he expressed that it would be deeply painful, Pasternak explained that it could not be prevented. He explained:\nBy 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems, aptly titled \"The Second Birth\". Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak's refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist emigres.\nIn 1932 Pasternak fell in love with Zinaida Neuhaus, the wife of the Russian pianist Heinrich Neuhaus. They both got divorces and married two years later.\nHe continued to change his poetry, simplifying his style and language through the years, as expressed in his next book, \"Early Trains\" (1943).\nStalin Epigram.\nIn April 1934 Osip Mandelstam recited his \"Stalin Epigram\" to Pasternak. After listening, Pasternak told Mandelstam: \"I didn't hear this, you didn't recite it to me, because, you know, very strange and terrible things are happening now: they've begun to pick people up. I'm afraid the walls have ears and perhaps even these benches on the boulevard here may be able to listen and tell tales. So let's make out that I heard nothing.\"\nOn the night of 14 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested at his home based on a warrant signed by NKVD boss Genrikh Yagoda. Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of \"Izvestia\" and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam's behalf.\nSoon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak's Moscow apartment. A voice from The Kremlin said, \"Comrade Stalin wishes to speak with you.\" According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb. \"He was totally unprepared for such a conversation. But then he heard \"his\" voice, the voice of Stalin, coming over the line. The Leader addressed him in a rather bluff uncouth fashion, using the familiar \"thou\" form: 'Tell me, what are they saying in your literary circles about the arrest of Mandelstam?'\" Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia. Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam. In an \"eager fumbling manner\" Pasternak explained that he and Mandelstam each had a completely different philosophy about poetry. Stalin finally said, in a mocking tone of voice: \"I see, you just aren't able to stick up for a comrade,\" and put down the receiver.\nGreat Purge.\nAccording to Pasternak, during the 1937 show trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants. Pasternak refused to sign, even after leadership of the Union visited and threatened him.\nSoon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin, describing his family's strong Tolstoyan convictions and putting his own life at Stalin's disposal; he said that he could not stand as a self-appointed judge of life and death. Pasternak was certain that he would be arrested, but instead Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak's name off an execution list, reportedly declaring, \"Do not touch this cloud dweller\" (or, in another version, \"Leave that holy fool alone!\")\nPasternak's close friend Titsian Tabidze did fall victim to the Great Purge. In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili as the greatest heartbreaks of his life.\nIvinskaya wrote, \"I believe that between Stalin and Pasternak there was an incredible, silent duel.\"\nWorld War II.\nWhen the Luftwaffe began bombing Moscow, Pasternak immediately began to serve as a fire warden on the roof of the writer's building on Lavrushinski Street. According to Ivinskaya, he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it.\nIn 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front. He bore it well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury), and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places. He read his poetry and talked extensively with the active and injured troops.\nWith the end of the war in 1945, the Soviet people expected to see the end of the devastation of Nazism, and hoped for the end of Stalin's Purges. But sealed trains began carrying large numbers of prisoners to the Soviet Gulags. Some were Nazi collaborators who had fought under General Andrey Vlasov, but most were ordinary Soviet officers and men. Pasternak watched as ex-POWs were directly transferred from Nazi Germany to Soviet concentration camps. White emigres who had returned due to pledges of amnesty were also sent directly to the Gulag, as were Jews from the Anti-Fascist Committee and other organizations. Many thousands of innocent people were incarcerated in connection with the Leningrad Affair and the so-called Doctor's Plot, while whole ethnic groups were deported to Siberia.\nPasternak later said, \"If, in a bad dream, we had seen all the horrors in store for us after the war, we should not have been sorry to see Stalin fall, together with Hitler. Then, an end to the war in favour of our allies, civilized countries with democratic traditions, would have meant a hundred times less suffering for our people than that which Stalin again inflicted on it after his victory.\"\nOlga Ivinskaya.\nIn October 1946, the twice married Pasternak met Olga Ivinskaya, a 34 year old single mother employed by \"Novy Mir\". Deeply moved by her resemblance to his first love Ida Vysotskaya, Pasternak gave Ivinskaya several volumes of his poetry and literary translations. Although Pasternak never left his wife Zinaida, he started an extramarital relationship with Ivinskaya that would last for the remainder of Pasternak's life. Ivinskaya later recalled, \"He phoned almost every day and, instinctively fearing to meet or talk with him, yet dying of happiness, I would stammer out that I was \"busy today.\" But almost every afternoon, toward the end of working hours, he came in person to the office and often walked with me through the streets, boulevards, and squares all the way home to Potapov Street. 'Shall I make you a present of this square?' he would ask.\"\nShe gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below. In the evenings, Pasternak would phone and Volkova would signal by Olga banging on the water pipe which connected their apartments.\nWhen they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi. Pasternak gave his lover a book of Pet\u0151fi with the inscription, \"Pet\u0151fi served as a code in May and June 1947, and my close translations of his lyrics are an expression, adapted to the requirements of the text, of my feelings and thoughts for you and about you. In memory of it all, B.P., 13 May 1948.\"\nPasternak later noted on a photograph of himself, \"Pet\u0151fi is magnificent with his descriptive lyrics and picture of nature, but you are better still. I worked on him a good deal in 1947 and 1948, when I first came to know you. Thank you for your help. I was translating both of you.\" Ivinskaya would later describe the Pet\u0151fi translations as, \"a first declaration of love.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband's infidelity. Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy's sickbed, that he would end his affair with Ivinskaya. Pasternak asked Luisa Popova, a mutual friend, to tell Ivinskaya about his promise. Popova told him that he must do it himself. Soon after, Ivinskaya happened to be ill at Popova's apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.\nIvinskaya later recalled,\nIn 1948, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya to resign her job at \"Novy Mir\", which was becoming extremely difficult due to their relationship. In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry. In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, \"Our Shop.\"\nOn the evening of 6 October 1949, Ivinskaya was arrested at her apartment by the KGB. Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son. Her apartment was ransacked and all items connected with Pasternak were piled up in her presence. Ivinskaya was taken to the Lubyanka Prison and repeatedly interrogated, where she refused to say anything incriminating about Pasternak. At the time, she was pregnant with Pasternak's child and had a miscarriage early in her ten-year sentence in the GULAG.\nUpon learning of his mistress' arrest, Pasternak telephoned Liuisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard. She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station. Weeping, Pasternak told her, \"Everything is finished now. They've taken her away from me and I'll never see her again. It's like death, even worse.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, \"After this, in conversation with people he scarcely knew, he always referred to Stalin as a 'murderer.' Talking with people in the offices of literary periodicals, he often asked: 'When will there be an end to this freedom for lackeys who happily walk over corpses to further their own interests?' He spent a good deal of time with Akhmatova\u2014who in those years was given a very wide berth by most of the people who knew her. He worked intensively on the second part of \"Doctor Zhivago\".\"\nIn a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, \"She was put in jail on my account, as the person considered by the secret police to be closest to me, and they hoped that by means of a gruelling interrogation and threats they could extract enough evidence from her to put me on trial. I owe my life, and the fact that they did not touch me in those years, to her heroism and endurance.\"\nTranslating Goethe.\nPasternak's translation of the of \"Faust\" led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of \"Novy Mir\". The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe's \"progressive\" meanings to support \"the reactionary theory of 'pure art'\", as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values. In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which \"Novy Mir\" considered, \"irrational,\" had been translated as Goethe had written them. Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the had not been revoked.\nKhrushchev thaw.\nWhen Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow. Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief. Pasternak wrote, \"Men who are not free... always idealize their bondage.\"\nAfter her release, Pasternak's relationship with Ivinskaya picked up where it had left off. Soon after he confided in her, \"For so long we were ruled over by a madman and a murderer, and now by a fool and a pig. The madman had his occasional flights of fancy, he had an intuitive feeling for certain things, despite his wild obscurantism. Now we are ruled over by mediocrities.\" During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell's \"Animal Farm\" in English. In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, \"vividly reminded\" him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.\n\"Doctor Zhivago\".\nAlthough it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was not completed until 1956. Pasternak submitted the novel to Novy Mir, which refused publication due to its rejection of socialist realism. The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the \"progress\" of society. Censors also regarded some passages as anti-Soviet, especially the novel's criticisms of Stalinism, Collectivisation, the Great Purge, and the Gulag.\nPasternak's fortunes were soon to change, however. In March 1956, the Italian Communist Party sent a journalist, Sergio D'Angelo, to work in the Soviet Union, and his status as a journalist as well as his membership in the Italian Communist Party allowed him to have access to various aspects of the cultural life in Moscow at the time. A Milan publisher, the communist Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, had also given him a commission to find new works of Soviet literature that would be appealing to Western audiences, and upon learning of \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s existence, D'Angelo travelled immediately to Peredelkino and offered to submit Pasternak's novel to Feltrinelli's company for publication. At first Pasternak was stunned. Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told D'Angelo with a laugh, \"You are hereby invited to watch me face the firing squad.\"\nAccording to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk. No Soviet author had attempted to deal with Western publishers since the 1920s, when such behavior led the Soviet State to declare war on Boris Pilnyak and Evgeny Zamyatin. Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli's Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia.\nIn a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of \"Doctor Zhivago\" to a Western publishing house. Pasternak, however, refused to change his mind and informed an emissary from Feltrinelli that he was prepared to undergo any sacrifice in order to see \"Doctor Zhivago\" published.\nIn 1957, Feltrinelli announced that the novel would be published by his company. Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication. According to Ivinskaya, \"He did not believe that we would ever publish the manuscript here and felt he had no right to withhold a masterpiece from the world \u2013 this would be an even greater crime.\" The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.\nHelped considerably by the Soviet campaign against the novel (as well as by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency's secret purchase of hundreds of copies of the book as it came off the presses around the world \u2013 see \"Nobel Prize\" section below), \"Doctor Zhivago\" became an instant sensation throughout the non-Communist world upon its release in November 1957. In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak's novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people. When informed of this, Pasternak responded, \"No matter. I am above race...\" According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence. At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy. Therefore, he believed that Soviet Jews converting to Christianity was preferable to assimilating into atheism and Stalinism.\nThe first English translation of \"Doctor Zhivago\" was hastily produced by Max Hayward and Manya Harari in order to coincide with overwhelming public demand. It was released in August 1958, and remained the only edition available for more than fifty years. Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of \"The New York Times\"' bestseller list.\nIvinskaya's daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat. Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was pilloried in the State-owned press. Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, \"I haven't read Pasternak, but I condemn him\".\nDuring the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak had regarded Stalin as a, \"giant of the pre-Christian era.\" Therefore, Pasternak's Christian-themed poems were, \"a form of protest.\"\nOn 9 September 1958, the \"Literary Gazette\" critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing, \"the decadent religious poetry of Pasternak, which reeks of mothballs from the Symbolist suitcase of 1908\u201310 manufacture.\" Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life.\nIn a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading \"Doctor Zhivago\". She had said, \"Don't forget yourself to the point of believing that it was you who wrote this work. It was the Russian people and their sufferings who created it. Thank God for having expressed it through your pen.\"\nNobel Prize.\nAccording to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, \"Rumors that Pasternak was to receive the Nobel Prize started right after the end of World War II. According to the former Nobel Committee head Lars Gyllensten, his nomination was discussed every year from 1946 to 1950, then again in 1957 (it was finally awarded in 1958). Pasternak guessed at this from the growing waves of criticism in USSR. Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: 'According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity\u2026'\"\nMeanwhile, Pasternak wrote to Renate Schweitzer and his sister, Lydia Pasternak Slater. In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia. Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.\nOn 23 October 1958, Boris Pasternak was announced as the winner of the Nobel Prize. The citation credited Pasternak's contribution to Russian lyric poetry and for his role in \"continuing the great Russian epic tradition.\" On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: \"Infinitely grateful, touched, proud, surprised, overwhelmed.\" That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel. They were further ordered to join a \"spontaneous\" demonstration demanding Pasternak's exile from the Soviet Union. On 26 October, the \"Literary Gazette\" ran an article by David Zaslavski entitled, \"Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed\".\nAccording to Solomon Volkov:\nFurthermore, Pasternak was informed that, if he traveled to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Medal, he would be refused re-entry to the Soviet Union. As a result, Pasternak sent a second telegram to the Nobel Committee: \"In view of the meaning given the award by the society in which I live, I must renounce this undeserved distinction which has been conferred on me. Please do not take my voluntary renunciation amiss.\" The Swedish Academy announced: \"This refusal, of course, in no way alters the validity of the award. There remains only for the Academy, however, to announce with regret that the presentation of the Prize cannot take place.\"\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"I couldn't recognize my father when I saw him that evening. Pale, lifeless face, tired painful eyes, and only speaking about the same thing: 'Now it all doesn\u2019t matter, I declined the Prize.\nDeportation plans.\nDespite his decision to decline the award, the Soviet Union of Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State-owned press. Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West. In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev,\nIn \"The Oak and the Calf\", Alexander Solzhenitsyn sharply criticized Pasternak, both for declining the Nobel Prize and for sending such a letter to Khrushchev. In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"She accused herself bitterly for persuading Pasternak to decline the Prize. After all that had happened, open shadowing, friends turning away, Pasternak's suicidal condition at the time, one can... understand her: the memory of Stalin's camps was too fresh, [and] she tried to protect him.\"\nOn 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors. According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal White emigre and a Fascist fifth columnist. Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union. They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to, \"his Capitalist paradise.\" According to Yevgenii Pasternak, however, author Konstantin Paustovsky refused to attend the meeting. Yevgeny Yevtushenko did attend, but walked out in disgust.\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, his father would have been exiled had it not been for Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who telephoned Khrushchev and threatened to organize a Committee for Pasternak's protection.\nIt is possible that the 1958 Nobel Prize prevented Pasternak's imprisonment due to the Soviet State's fear of international protests. Yevgenii Pasternak believes, however, that the resulting persecution fatally weakened his father's health.\nMeanwhile, Bill Mauldin produced that won the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning. The cartoon depicts Pasternak as a GULAG inmate splitting trees in the snow, saying to another inmate: \"I won the Nobel Prize for Literature. What was your crime?\"\nLast years.\nPasternak's post-\"Zhivago\" poetry probes the universal questions of love, immortality, and reconciliation with God. Boris Pasternak wrote his last complete book, \"When the Weather Clears\", in 1959.\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over \"Doctor Zhivago\". He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz S\u0142owacki and Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca. In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discreet support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party's literary apparatus. Ivinskaya describes Liubimov as, \"a shrewd and enlightened person who understood very well that all the mudslinging and commotion over the novel would be forgotten, but that there would always be a Pasternak.\" In a letter to his sisters in Oxford, England, Pasternak claimed to have finished translating one of Calderon's plays in less than a week.\nDuring the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing \"The Blind Beauty\", a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II's abolition of serfdom in Russia. In an interview with Olga Carlisle from \"The Paris Review\", Pasternak enthusiastically described the play's plot and characters. He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of \"The Blind Beauty\", he wished to depict \"the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic\". However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.\n\"Unique Days\".\n\"Unique Days\" was the last poem Pasternak wrote.\nDeath.\nBoris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960. He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, \"Who will suffer most because of my death? Who will suffer most? Only Oliusha will, and I haven't had time to do anything for her. The worst thing is that she will suffer.\" Pasternak's last words were, \"I can't hear very well. And there's a mist in front of my eyes. But it will go away, won't it? Don't forget to open the window tomorrow.\"\nShortly before his death, a priest of the Russian Orthodox Church had given Pasternak the last rites. Later, in the strictest secrecy, a Russian Orthodox funeral liturgy, or Panikhida, was offered in the family's dacha.\nFuneral demonstration.\nDespite only a small notice appearing in the \"Literary Gazette\", handwritten notices carrying the date and time of the funeral were posted throughout the Moscow subway system. As a result, thousands of admirers braved Militia and KGB surveillance to attend Pasternak's funeral in Peredelkino.\nBefore Pasternak's civil funeral, Ivinskaya had a conversation with Konstantin Paustovsky. According to her,\nThen, in the presence of a large number of foreign journalists, the body of Pasternak was removed to the cemetery. According to Ivinskaya,\nTo the horror of the assembled Party officials, however, someone with \"a young and deeply anguished voice\" began reciting Pasternak's banned poem \"Hamlet\".\nAccording to Ivinskaya,\nThe final speaker at the graveside service said,\nAs the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino's Church of the Transfiguration began to toll. Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak's forehead and the coffin was closed and buried. Pasternak's gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement.\nModern research about the CIA role in the 1958 Nobel Award.\nWriter and Radio Liberty journalist Ivan Tolstoy wrote the book \"The Laundered Novel: Doctor Zhivago between the KGB and the CIA\", published in Russia in December 2008.\nIvan Tolstoy said in his book the British MI6 and the American CIA allegedly lent a hand to ensure that \"Doctor Zhivago\" was submitted to the Nobel Committee in the original Russian. According to Tolstoy, this was allegedly done so that Pasternak could win the Nobel Prize and harm the international credibility of the Soviet Union. He repeats and elaborates upon Feltrinelli's claims that the CIA operatives had photographed a manuscript of the novel and secretly printed a small number of books in the Russian language.\nIvan Tolstoy explained on a Russian radio program Echo of Moscow, aired on 7 December 2008, his research about whether the Central Intelligence Agency helped Pasternak win the Nobel Prize. He said \"...possibly, because of the publication of this CIA's Russian edition, Pasternak received the Nobel Prize. I emphasize \u2014 it is possible! These documents do not exist. I suppose he got it, after all, because of the CIA edition. But I stipulate this very carefully.\"\nAnna Sergeyeva-Klyatis, a Russian philologist, published her research in 2012, where she suggested, that the first Russian edition of \"Doctor Zhivago\", which was a pirated version with numerous typographical errors and omissions, was actually initiated by the Central Association of Postwar \u00c9migr\u00e9s, in response to a growing demand among Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s.\nOn 14 April 2014, The Central Intelligence Agency declassified more than 130 documents of files about 1,000 Russian copies published by the Mouton Publishers of the Hague early September 1958. In one of the files, dated 12 December 1957, the CIA agents recommend: \"\"Dr. Zhivago\" should be published in a maximum number of foreign editions, for maximum free world discussion and acclaim and consideration for such honor as the Nobel prize\" [sic]\nIn its announcement of the declassification of the \"Zhivago\" documents the CIA states: \"After working secretly to publish the Russian-language edition in the Netherlands, the CIA moved quickly to ensure that copies of Doctor Zhivago were available for distribution to Soviet visitors at the 1958 Brussels World\u2019s Fair. By the end of the Fair, 355 copies of Doctor Zhivago had been surreptitiously handed out...\"\nThe Washington Post's journalist Peter Finn and writer Petra Couv\u00e9e, who collaborated on a book titled \"The Zhivago Affair\", after studying the disclosed files, said: \"While the CIA hoped Pasternak\u2019s novel would draw global attention, including from the Swedish Academy, there was no indication that the agency\u2019s motive for printing a Russian-language edition was to help Pasternak win the prize, something that has been a matter of speculation for some decades.\"\nLegacy.\nAfter Pasternak's death, Ivinskaya was arrested for the second time, with her daughter, Irina Emelyanova. Both were accused of being Pasternak's link with Western publishers and of dealing in hard currency for \"Doctor Zhivago\". All of Pasternak's letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB. The KGB quietly released them, Irina after one year, in 1962, and Olga in 1964. By this time, Ivinskaya had served four years of an eight-year sentence, in retaliation for her role in \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s publication. In 1978, her memoirs were smuggled abroad and published in Paris. An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title \"A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak\".\nIvinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ivinskaya sued for the return of the letters and documents seized by the KGB in 1961. The Russian Supreme Court ultimately ruled against her, stating that \"there was no proof of ownership\" and that the \"papers should remain in the state archive\". Ivinskaya died of cancer on 8 September 1995. A reporter on NTV compared her role to that of other famous muses for Russian poets: \"As Pushkin would not be complete without Anna Kern, and Yesenin would be nothing without Isadora, so Pasternak would not be Pasternak without Olga Ivinskaya, who was his inspiration for \"Doctor Zhivago\".\".\nMeanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.\nIn 1980, an asteroid 3508 Pasternak was named after Boris Pasternak.\nIn 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was serialized in the literary journal \"Novy Mir\".\nIn December 1989, Yevgenii Borisovich Pasternak was permitted to travel to Stockholm in order to collect his father's Nobel Medal. At the ceremony, acclaimed cellist and Soviet dissident Mstislav Rostropovich performed a Bach serenade in honor of his deceased countryman.\nA 2009 book by Ivan Tolstoi reasserts claims that British and American intelligence officers were involved in ensuring Pasternak's Nobel victory; another Russian researcher, however, disagreed. When Yevgeny Borisovich Pasternak was questioned about this, he responded that his father was completely unaware of the actions of Western intelligence services. Yevgeny further declared that the Nobel Prize caused his father nothing but severe grief and harassment at the hands of the Soviet State.\nThe Pasternak family papers are stored at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University. They contain correspondence, drafts of \"Doctor Zhivago\" and other writings, photographs, and other material, of Boris Pasternak and other family members.\nSince 2003, the novel \"Doctor Zhivago\" has entered the Russian school curriculum, where it is read in the 11th grade of secondary school.\nCommemoration.\nIn October 1984 by decision of a court, Pasternak\u2019s dacha in Peredelkino was taken from the writer's relatives and transferred to state ownership. Two years later, in 1986, the House-Museum of Boris Pasternak was founded (the first house-museum in the USSR).\nIn 1990, the year of the poet\u2019s 100th anniversary, the Pasternak Museum opened its doors in Chistopol, in the house where the poet evacuated to during the Great Patriotic War (1941\u20131943), and in Peredelkino, where he lived for many years until his death. The head of the poet\u2019s house-museum is Natalia Pasternak, his daughter-in-law (widow of the youngest son Leonid).\nIn 2008 a museum was opened in Vsevolodo-Vilva in the house where the budding poet lived from January to June 1916.\nIn 2009 on the City Day in Perm the first Russian monument to Pasternak was erected in the square near the Opera Theater (sculptor: Elena Munc).\nA memorial plaque was installed on the house where Pasternak was born.\nIn memory of poet's three-time stay in Tula, on 27 May 2005 a marble memorial plaque to Pasternak was installed on the W\u00f6rmann hotel's wall, as Pasternak was a Nobel laureate and dedicated several of his works to Tula.\nOn 20 February 2008, in Kyiv, a memorial plaque was put up on the house \u21169 on Lipinsky Street, but seven years later it was stolen by vandals.\nIn 2012 a monument to Boris Pasternak was erected in the district center of Muchkapsky by Z. Tsereteli.\nIn 1990 as part of the series \"Nobel Prize Winners\" the USSR and Sweden (\"Nobel Prize Winners \u2013 Literature\") issued stamps depicting Boris Pasternak.\nIn 2015 as part of the series \"125th Annive. of the Birth of Boris Pasternak, 1890\u20131960\" Mozambique issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. Although this issue was acknowledged by the postal administration of Mozambique, the issue was not placed on sale in Mozambique, and was only distributed to the new issue trade by Mozambique's philatelic agent.\nIn 2015 as part of the series \"125th Birth Anniversary of Boris Pasternak\" Maldives issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. The issue was acknowledged by the Maldive postal authorities, but only distributed by the Maldive philatelic agent for collecting purposes.\nOn the occasion of the 50th anniversary of B. Pasternak's Nobel Prize, the Principality of Monaco issued a postage stamp in his memory.\nOn 27 January 2015, in honor of the poet\u2019s 125th birthday, the Russian Post issued an envelope with the original stamp.\nOn 1 October 2015, a monument to Pasternak was erected in Chistopol.\nOn 10 February 2021, Google celebrated his 131st birthday with a Google Doodle. The Doodle was displayed in Russia, Sweden, some Middle Eastern countries and some Mediterranean countries.\nAdaptations.\nThe first screen adaptation of \"Doctor Zhivago\", adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965. The film, which toured in the roadshow tradition, starred Omar Sharif, Geraldine Chaplin, and Julie Christie. Concentrating on the love triangle aspects of the novel, the film became a worldwide blockbuster, but was unavailable in Russia until Perestroika.\nIn 2002, the novel was adapted as a television miniseries. Directed by Giacomo Campiotti, the serial starred Hans Matheson, Alexandra Maria Lara, Keira Knightley, and Sam Neill.\nThe Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Aleksandr Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is considered more faithful to Pasternak's novel than David Lean's 1965 film.\nWork.\nPoetry.\nThoughts on poetry.\nAccording to Olga Ivinskaya:\nFor this reason, Pasternak regularly avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse. According to Ivinskaya, \"It was this sort of thing that moved him to say: 'Who started the idea that I love poetry? I can't stand poetry.'\"\nAlso according to Ivinskaya, \"'The way they could write!' he once exclaimed \u2013 by 'they' he meant the Russian classics. And immediately afterward, reading or, rather, glancing through some verse in the \"Literary Gazette\": 'Just look how tremendously well they've learned to rhyme! But there's actually nothing there \u2013 it would be better to say it in a news bulletin. What has poetry got to do with this?' By 'they' in this case, he meant the poets writing today.\"\nTranslation.\nReluctant to conform to socialist realism, Pasternak turned to translation in order to provide for his family. He soon produced acclaimed translations of S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Rainer Maria Rilke, Paul Verlaine, Taras Shevchenko, and Nikoloz Baratashvili. Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, \"Your collected works will consist of twelve volumes of translations, and only one of your own work.\"\nIn a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, \"I am completely opposed to contemporary ideas about translation. The work of Lozinski, Radlova, Marshak, and Chukovski is alien to me, and seems artificial, soulless, and lacking in depth. I share the nineteenth-century view of translation as a literary exercise demanding insight of a higher kind than that provided by a merely philological approach.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak believed in not being too literal in his translations, which he felt could confuse the meaning of the text. He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths.\nPasternak's translations of William Shakespeare (\"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", \"Othello\", \"King Henry IV\" (Part I) and Part II), \"Hamlet\", \"Macbeth\", \"King Lear\") remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues. Pasternak's critics, however, accused him of \"pasternakizing\" Shakespeare. In a 1956 essay, Pasternak wrote: \"Translating Shakespeare is a task which takes time and effort. Once it is undertaken, it is best to divide it into sections long enough for the work to not get stale and to complete one section each day. In thus daily progressing through the text, the translator finds himself reliving the circumstances of the author. Day by day, he reproduces his actions and he is drawn into some of his secrets, not in theory, but practically, by experience.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya:\nWhile they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya: \"1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones. You may allow yourself to use assonances.\"\nLater, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of V\u00edt\u011bzslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya:\nAccording to Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak. She later recalled:\nMusic.\nBoris Pasternak was also a composer, and had a promising musical career as a musician ahead of him, had he chosen to pursue it. He came from a musical family: his mother was a concert pianist and a student of Anton Rubinstein and Theodor Leschetizky, and Pasternak's early impressions were of hearing piano trios in the home. The family had a dacha (country house) close to one occupied by Alexander Scriabin. Sergei Rachmaninoff, Rainer Maria Rilke and Leo Tolstoy were all visitors to the family home. His father Leonid was a painter who produced one of the most important portraits of Scriabin, and Pasternak wrote many years later of witnessing with great excitement the creation of Scriabin's Symphony No. 3 (\"The Divine Poem\"), in 1903.\nPasternak began to compose at the age of 13. The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but \u2013 inspired by Scriabin \u2013 he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University. Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Aleksandr Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.\nPasternak's early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin. His single-movement Piano Sonata of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice. Nominally in B minor, it moves freely from key to key with frequent changes of key-signature and a chromatic dissonant style that defies easy analysis. Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Rayki, some 40\u00a0km north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students."}
{"id": "4668", "revid": "414836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4668", "title": "Binomial coefficient", "text": "In mathematics, the binomial coefficients are the positive integers that occur as coefficients in the binomial theorem. Commonly, a binomial coefficient is indexed by a pair of integers and is written formula_1 It is the coefficient of the term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power , and is given by the formula\nFor example, the fourth power of is\nand the binomial coefficient formula_4 is the coefficient of the term.\nArranging the numbers formula_5 in successive rows for formula_6 gives a triangular array called Pascal's triangle, satisfying the recurrence relation \nThe binomial coefficients occur in many areas of mathematics, and especially in combinatorics. The symbol formula_8 is usually read as \" choose \" because there are formula_8 ways to choose an (unordered) subset of elements from a fixed set of elements. For example, there are formula_10 ways to choose 2 elements from formula_11 namely formula_12 and formula_13\nThe binomial coefficients can be generalized to formula_14 for any complex number and integer , and many of their properties continue to hold in this more general form.\nHistory and notation.\nAndreas von Ettingshausen introduced the notation formula_15 in 1826, although the numbers were known centuries earlier (see Pascal's triangle). The earliest known detailed discussion of binomial coefficients is in a tenth-century commentary, by Halayudha, on an ancient Sanskrit text, Pingala's \"Chanda\u1e25\u015b\u0101stra\". In about 1150, the Indian mathematician Bhaskaracharya gave an exposition of binomial coefficients in his book \"L\u012bl\u0101vat\u012b\".\nAlternative notations include , , , , , and in all of which the stands for \"combinations\" or \"choices\". Many calculators use variants of the because they can represent it on a single-line display. In this form the binomial coefficients are easily compared to -permutations of, written as , etc.\nDefinition and interpretations.\nFor natural numbers (taken to include 0) \"n\" and \"k\", the binomial coefficient formula_15 can be defined as the coefficient of the monomial \"X\"\"k\" in the expansion of . The same coefficient also occurs (if ) in the binomial formula\n(valid for any elements \"x\", \"y\" of a commutative ring),\nwhich explains the name \"binomial coefficient\".\nAnother occurrence of this number is in combinatorics, where it gives the number of ways, disregarding order, that \"k\" objects can be chosen from among \"n\" objects; more formally, the number of \"k\"-element subsets (or \"k\"-combinations) of an \"n\"-element set. This number can be seen as equal to the one of the first definition, independently of any of the formulas below to compute it: if in each of the \"n\" factors of the power one temporarily labels the term \"X\" with an index \"i\" (running from 1 to \"n\"), then each subset of \"k\" indices gives after expansion a contribution \"X\"\"k\", and the coefficient of that monomial in the result will be the number of such subsets. This shows in particular that formula_15 is a natural number for any natural numbers \"n\" and \"k\". There are many other combinatorial interpretations of binomial coefficients (counting problems for which the answer is given by a binomial coefficient expression), for instance the number of words formed of \"n\" bits (digits 0 or 1) whose sum is \"k\" is given by formula_15, while the number of ways to write formula_19 where every \"a\"\"i\" is a nonnegative integer is given by formula_20. Most of these interpretations are easily seen to be equivalent to counting \"k\"-combinations.\nComputing the value of binomial coefficients.\nSeveral methods exist to compute the value of formula_15 without actually expanding a binomial power or counting \"k\"-combinations.\nRecursive formula.\nOne method uses the recursive, purely additive formula\nwith initial/boundary values\nThe formula follows from considering the set {1, 2, 3, ..., \"n\"} and counting separately (a) the \"k\"-element groupings that include a particular set element, say \"\"i\", in every group (since \"i\" is already chosen to fill one spot in every group, we need only choose \"k\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 from the remaining \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) and (b) all the \"k\"-groupings that don't include \"i\"\"; this enumerates all the possible \"k\"-combinations of \"n\" elements. It also follows from tracing the contributions to \"X\"\"k\" in . As there is zero \"X\"\"n\"+1 or \"X\"\u22121 in , one might extend the definition beyond the above boundaries to include formula_15\u00a0=\u00a00 when either \"k\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"n\" or \"k\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a00. This recursive formula then allows the construction of Pascal's triangle, surrounded by white spaces where the zeros, or the trivial coefficients, would be.\nMultiplicative formula.\nA more efficient method to compute individual binomial coefficients is given by the formula\nwhere the numerator of the first fraction formula_26 is expressed as a falling factorial power.\nThis formula is easiest to understand for the combinatorial interpretation of binomial coefficients.\nThe numerator gives the number of ways to select a sequence of \"k\" distinct objects, retaining the order of selection, from a set of \"n\" objects. The denominator counts the number of distinct sequences that define the same \"k\"-combination when order is disregarded.\nDue to the symmetry of the binomial coefficient with regard to \"k\" and , calculation may be optimised by setting the upper limit of the product above to the smaller of \"k\" and .\nFactorial formula.\nFinally, though computationally unsuitable, there is the compact form, often used in proofs and derivations, which makes repeated use of the familiar factorial function:\nwhere \"n\"! denotes the factorial of \"n\". This formula follows from the multiplicative formula above by multiplying numerator and denominator by ; as a consequence it involves many factors common to numerator and denominator. It is less practical for explicit computation (in the case that \"k\" is small and \"n\" is large) unless common factors are first cancelled (in particular since factorial values grow very rapidly). The formula does exhibit a symmetry that is less evident from the multiplicative formula (though it is from the definitions)\nwhich leads to a more efficient multiplicative computational routine. Using the falling factorial notation,\nGeneralization and connection to the binomial series.\nThe multiplicative formula allows the definition of binomial coefficients to be extended by replacing \"n\" by an arbitrary number \"\u03b1\" (negative, real, complex) or even an element of any commutative ring in which all positive integers are invertible:\nWith this definition one has a generalization of the binomial formula (with one of the variables set to 1), which justifies still calling the formula_30 binomial coefficients:\nThis formula is valid for all complex numbers \"\u03b1\" and \"X\" with |\"X\"|\u00a0&lt;\u00a01. It can also be interpreted as an identity of formal power series in \"X\", where it actually can serve as definition of arbitrary powers of power series with constant coefficient equal to\u00a01; the point is that with this definition all identities hold that one expects for exponentiation, notably\nIf \"\u03b1\" is a nonnegative integer \"n\", then all terms with \"k\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"n\" are zero, and the infinite series becomes a finite sum, thereby recovering the binomial formula. However, for other values of \"\u03b1\", including negative integers and rational numbers, the series is really infinite.\nPascal's triangle.\nPascal's rule is the important recurrence relation\nwhich can be used to prove by mathematical induction that formula_32 is a natural number for all integer \"n\" \u2265 0 and all integer \"k\", a fact that is not immediately obvious from formula (1). To the left and right of Pascal's triangle, the entries (shown as blanks) are all zero. \nPascal's rule also gives rise to Pascal's triangle:\nRow number contains the numbers formula_8 for . It is constructed by first placing 1s in the outermost positions, and then filling each inner position with the sum of the two numbers directly above. This method allows the quick calculation of binomial coefficients without the need for fractions or multiplications. For instance, by looking at row number 5 of the triangle, one can quickly read off that\nCombinatorics and statistics.\nBinomial coefficients are of importance in combinatorics, because they provide ready formulas for certain frequent counting problems:\nBinomial coefficients as polynomials.\nFor any nonnegative integer \"k\", the expression formula_41 can be simplified and defined as a polynomial divided by \"k\"!:\nthis presents a polynomial in \"t\" with rational coefficients.\nAs such, it can be evaluated at any real or complex number \"t\" to define binomial coefficients with such first arguments. These \"generalized binomial coefficients\" appear in Newton's generalized binomial theorem.\nFor each \"k\", the polynomial formula_43 can be characterized as the unique degree \"k\" polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") satisfying \"p\"(0) = \"p\"(1) = \u22ef = \"p\"(\"k\" \u2212 1) = 0 and \"p\"(\"k\") = 1.\nIts coefficients are expressible in terms of Stirling numbers of the first kind:\nThe derivative of formula_43 can be calculated by logarithmic differentiation:\nThis can cause a problem when evaluated at integers from formula_47 to formula_48, but using identities below we can compute the derivative as:\nBinomial coefficients as a basis for the space of polynomials.\nOver any field of characteristic 0 (that is, any field that contains the rational numbers), each polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") of degree at most \"d\" is uniquely expressible as a linear combination formula_50 of binomial coefficients. The coefficient \"a\"\"k\" is the \"k\"th difference of the sequence \"p\"(0), \"p\"(1), ..., \"p\"(\"k\"). Explicitly,\nInteger-valued polynomials.\nEach polynomial formula_43 is integer-valued: it has an integer value at all integer inputs formula_52. (One way to prove this is by induction on \"k\", using Pascal's identity.) Therefore, any integer linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials is integer-valued too. Conversely, () shows that any integer-valued polynomial is an integer linear combination of these binomial coefficient polynomials. More generally, for any subring \"R\" of a characteristic 0 field \"K\", a polynomial in \"K\"[\"t\"] takes values in \"R\" at all integers if and only if it is an \"R\"-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials.\nExample.\nThe integer-valued polynomial 3\"t\"(3\"t\"\u00a0+\u00a01)/2 can be rewritten as\nIdentities involving binomial coefficients.\nThe factorial formula facilitates relating nearby binomial coefficients. For instance, if \"k\" is a positive integer and \"n\" is arbitrary, then\nand, with a little more work,\nMoreover, the following may be useful:\nFor constant \"n\", we have the following recurrence:\nSums of the binomial coefficients.\nThe formula\nsays the elements in the th row of Pascal's triangle always add up to 2 raised to the th power. This is obtained from the binomial theorem () by setting \"x\" = 1 and \"y\" = 1. The formula also has a natural combinatorial interpretation: the left side sums the number of subsets of {1, ..., \"n\"} of sizes \"k\" = 0, 1, ..., \"n\", giving the total number of subsets. (That is, the left side counts the power set of {1, ..., \"n\"}.) However, these subsets can also be generated by successively choosing or excluding each element 1, ..., \"n\"; the \"n\" independent binary choices (bit-strings) allow a total of formula_57 choices. The left and right sides are two ways to count the same collection of subsets, so they are equal.\nThe formulas\nand\nfollow from the binomial theorem after differentiating with respect to (twice for the latter) and then substituting .\nThe Chu\u2013Vandermonde identity, which holds for any complex-values \"m\" and \"n\" and any non-negative integer \"k\", is\nand can be found by examination of the coefficient of formula_59 in the expansion of using equation (). When , equation () reduces to equation (). In the special case , using (), the expansion () becomes (as seen in Pascal's triangle at right)\nwhere the term on the right side is a central binomial coefficient.\nAnother form of the Chu\u2013Vandermonde identity, which applies for any integers \"j\", \"k\", and \"n\" satisfying , is\nThe proof is similar, but uses the binomial series expansion () with negative integer exponents.\nWhen , equation () gives the hockey-stick identity\nand its relative\nLet \"F\"(\"n\") denote the \"n\"-th Fibonacci number.\nThen\nThis can be proved by induction using () or by Zeckendorf's representation. A combinatorial proof is given below.\nMultisections of sums.\nFor integers \"s\" and \"t\" such that formula_63 series multisection gives the following identity for the sum of binomial coefficients:\nFor small \"s\", these series have particularly nice forms; for example,\nPartial sums.\nAlthough there is no closed formula for partial sums\nof binomial coefficients, one can again use () and induction to show that for ,\nwith special case\nfor \"n\" &gt; 0. This latter result is also a special case of the result from the theory of finite differences that for any polynomial \"P\"(\"x\") of degree less than \"n\",\nDifferentiating () \"k\" times and setting \"x\" = \u22121 yields this for\nformula_76,\nwhen 0 \u2264 \"k\" &lt; \"n\",\nand the general case follows by taking linear combinations of these.\nWhen \"P\"(\"x\") is of degree less than or equal to \"n\",\nwhere formula_77 is the coefficient of degree \"n\" in \"P\"(\"x\").\nMore generally for (),\nwhere \"m\" and \"d\" are complex numbers. This follows immediately applying () to the polynomial instead of , and observing that still has degree less than or equal to \"n\", and that its coefficient of degree \"n\" is \"dnan\".\nThe series\nformula_79 is convergent for \"k\" \u2265 2. This formula is used in the analysis of the German tank problem. It follows from formula_80\nwhich is proved by induction on \"M\".\nIdentities with combinatorial proofs.\nMany identities involving binomial coefficients can be proved by combinatorial means. For example, for nonnegative integers formula_81, the identity\n(which reduces to () when \"q\" = 1) can be given a double counting proof, as follows. The left side counts the number of ways of selecting a subset of [\"n\"] = {1, 2, ..., \"n\"} with at least \"q\" elements, and marking \"q\" elements among those selected. The right side counts the same thing, because there are formula_83 ways of choosing a set of \"q\" elements to mark, and formula_84 to choose which of the remaining elements of [\"n\"] also belong to the subset.\nIn Pascal's identity\nboth sides count the number of \"k\"-element subsets of [\"n\"]: the two terms on the right side group them into those that contain element \"n\" and those that do not.\nThe identity () also has a combinatorial proof. The identity reads\nSuppose you have formula_87 empty squares arranged in a row and you want to mark (select) \"n\" of them. There are formula_88 ways to do this. On the other hand, you may select your \"n\" squares by selecting \"k\" squares from among the first \"n\" and formula_89 squares from the remaining \"n\" squares; any \"k\" from 0 to \"n\" will work. This gives\nNow apply () to get the result.\nIf one denotes by the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, indexed so that , then the identity \nformula_91\nhas the following combinatorial proof. One may show by induction that counts the number of ways that a strip of squares may be covered by and tiles. On the other hand, if such a tiling uses exactly of the tiles, then it uses of the tiles, and so uses tiles total. There are formula_92 ways to order these tiles, and so summing this coefficient over all possible values of gives the identity.\nSum of coefficients row.\nThe number of \"k\"-combinations for all \"k\", formula_93, is the sum of the \"n\"th row (counting from 0) of the binomial coefficients. These combinations are enumerated by the 1 digits of the set of base 2 numbers counting from 0 to formula_94, where each digit position is an item from the set of \"n\".\nDixon's identity.\nDixon's identity is\nor, more generally,\nwhere \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are non-negative integers.\nContinuous identities.\nCertain trigonometric integrals have values expressible in terms of\nbinomial coefficients: For any formula_97\nThese can be proved by using Euler's formula to convert trigonometric functions to complex exponentials, expanding using the binomial theorem, and integrating term by term.\nGenerating functions.\nOrdinary generating functions.\nFor a fixed , the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_101 is\nFor a fixed , the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_103 is\nThe bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is\nA symmetric bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is\nwhich is the same as the previous generating function after the substitution formula_107.\nExponential generating function.\nA symmetric exponential bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:\nDivisibility properties.\nIn 1852, Kummer proved that if \"m\" and \"n\" are nonnegative integers and \"p\" is a prime number, then the largest power of \"p\" dividing formula_109 equals \"p\"\"c\", where \"c\" is the number of carries when \"m\" and \"n\" are added in base \"p\".\nEquivalently, the exponent of a prime \"p\" in formula_35\nequals the number of nonnegative integers \"j\" such that the fractional part of \"k\"/\"p\"\"j\" is greater than the fractional part of \"n\"/\"p\"\"j\". It can be deduced from this that formula_35 is divisible by \"n\"/gcd(\"n\",\"k\"). In particular therefore it follows that \"p\" divides formula_112 for all positive integers \"r\" and \"s\" such that . However this is not true of higher powers of \"p\": for example 9 does not divide formula_113.\nA somewhat surprising result by David Singmaster (1974) is that any integer divides almost all binomial coefficients. More precisely, fix an integer \"d\" and let \"f\"(\"N\") denote the number of binomial coefficients formula_35 with \"n\" &lt; \"N\" such that \"d\" divides formula_35. Then\nSince the number of binomial coefficients formula_35 with \"n\" &lt; \"N\" is \"N\"(\"N\" + 1) / 2, this implies that the density of binomial coefficients divisible by \"d\" goes to 1.\nBinomial coefficients have divisibility properties related to least common multiples of consecutive integers. For example:\nformula_118 divides formula_119.\nformula_118 is a multiple of formula_121.\nAnother fact:\nAn integer is prime if and only if\nall the intermediate binomial coefficients\nare divisible by \"n\".\nProof:\nWhen \"p\" is prime, \"p\" divides\nbecause formula_124 is a natural number and \"p\" divides the numerator but not the denominator.\nWhen \"n\" is composite, let \"p\" be the smallest prime factor of \"n\" and let . Then and\notherwise the numerator has to be divisible by , this can only be the case when is divisible by \"p\". But \"n\" is divisible by \"p\", so \"p\" does not divide and because \"p\" is prime, we know that \"p\" does not divide and so the numerator cannot be divisible by \"n\".\nBounds and asymptotic formulas.\nThe following bounds for formula_35 hold for all values of \"n\" and \"k\" such that 1\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"k\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"n\":\nThe first inequality follows from the fact that\nand each of these formula_129 terms in this product is formula_130. A similar argument can be made to show the second inequality. The final strict inequality is equivalent to formula_131, that is clear since the RHS is a term of the exponential series formula_132.\nFrom the divisibility properties we can infer that\nwhere both equalities can be achieved.\nBoth and large.\nStirling's approximation yields the following approximation, valid when formula_134 both tend to infinity:\nBecause the inequality forms of Stirling's formula also bound the factorials, slight variants on the above asymptotic approximation give exact bounds.\nIn particular, when formula_136 is sufficiently large:\nand, in general, for \"m\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a02 and \"n\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a01,\nAnother useful asymptotic approximation for when both numbers grow at the same rate is\nwhere formula_141 is the binary entropy function.\nIf \"n\" is large and \"k\" is linear in \"n\", various precise asymptotic estimates exist for the binomial coefficient formula_142. For example, if formula_143 then\nwhere \"d\" = \"n\" \u2212 2\"k\".\nmuch larger than.\nIf is large and is (that is, if ), then\nformula_145\nwhere again is the little o notation.\nSums of binomial coefficients.\nA simple and rough upper bound for the sum of binomial coefficients can be obtained using the binomial theorem:\nMore precise bounds are given by\nwhich is valid for all integers formula_148 with formula_149.\nGeneralized binomial coefficients.\nThe infinite product formula for the Gamma function also gives an expression for binomial coefficients\nwhich yields the asymptotic formulas\nas formula_152.\nThis asymptotic behaviour is contained in the approximation\nas well. (Here formula_154 is the \"k\"-th harmonic number and formula_155 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.)\nFurther, the asymptotic formula\nhold true, whenever formula_157 and formula_158 for some complex number formula_159.\nGeneralizations.\nGeneralization to multinomials.\nBinomial coefficients can be generalized to multinomial coefficients defined to be the number:\nwhere\nWhile the binomial coefficients represent the coefficients of (\"x\"+\"y\")\"n\", the multinomial coefficients\nrepresent the coefficients of the polynomial\nThe case \"r\" = 2 gives binomial coefficients:\nThe combinatorial interpretation of multinomial coefficients is distribution of \"n\" distinguishable elements over \"r\" (distinguishable) containers, each containing exactly \"ki\" elements, where \"i\" is the index of the container.\nMultinomial coefficients have many properties similar to those of binomial coefficients, for example the recurrence relation:\nand symmetry:\nwhere formula_166 is a permutation of (1, 2, ..., \"r\").\nTaylor series.\nUsing Stirling numbers of the first kind the series expansion around any arbitrarily chosen point formula_167 is\nBinomial coefficient with \"n\" = 1/2.\nThe definition of the binomial coefficients can be extended to the case where formula_136 is real and formula_170 is integer.\nIn particular, the following identity holds for any non-negative integer formula_170 :\nThis shows up when expanding formula_173 into a power series using the Newton binomial series :\nProducts of binomial coefficients.\nOne can express the product of two binomial coefficients as a linear combination of binomial coefficients:\nwhere the connection coefficients are multinomial coefficients. In terms of labelled combinatorial objects, the connection coefficients represent the number of ways to assign \"m\" + \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" labels to a pair of labelled combinatorial objects\u2014of weight \"m\" and \"n\" respectively\u2014that have had their first \"k\" labels identified, or glued together to get a new labelled combinatorial object of weight \"m\" + \"n\" \u2212 \"k\". (That is, to separate the labels into three portions to apply to the glued part, the unglued part of the first object, and the unglued part of the second object.) In this regard, binomial coefficients are to exponential generating series what falling factorials are to ordinary generating series.\nThe product of all binomial coefficients in the \"n\"th row of the Pascal triangle is given by the formula:\nPartial fraction decomposition.\nThe partial fraction decomposition of the reciprocal is given by\nNewton's binomial series.\nNewton's binomial series, named after Sir Isaac Newton, is a generalization of the binomial theorem to infinite series:\nThe identity can be obtained by showing that both sides satisfy the differential equation (1 + \"z\") \"f\"'(\"z\") = \u03b1 \"f\"(\"z\").\nThe radius of convergence of this series is 1. An alternative expression is\nwhere the identity\nis applied.\nMultiset (rising) binomial coefficient.\nBinomial coefficients count subsets of prescribed size from a given set. A related combinatorial problem is to count multisets of prescribed size with elements drawn from a given set, that is, to count the number of ways to select a certain number of elements from a given set with the possibility of selecting the same element repeatedly. The resulting numbers are called \"multiset coefficients\"; the number of ways to \"multichoose\" (i.e., choose with replacement) \"k\" items from an \"n\" element set is denoted formula_181.\nTo avoid ambiguity and confusion with \"n\"'s main denotation in this article,&lt;br&gt; let \"f\" = \"n\" = \"r\" + (\"k\" \u2013 1) and \"r\" = \"f\" \u2013 (\"k\" \u2013 1).\nMultiset coefficients may be expressed in terms of binomial coefficients by the rule\nOne possible alternative characterization of this identity is as follows:\nWe may define the falling factorial as\nand the corresponding rising factorial as\nso, for example,\nThen the binomial coefficients may be written as \nwhile the corresponding multiset coefficient is defined by replacing the falling with the rising factorial:\nGeneralization to negative integers \"n\".\nFor any \"n\",\nIn particular, binomial coefficients evaluated at negative integers \"n\" are given by signed multiset coefficients. In the special case formula_189, this reduces to formula_190\nFor example, if \"n\" = \u22124 and \"k\" = 7, then \"r\" = 4 and \"f\" = 10:\nTwo real or complex valued arguments.\nThe binomial coefficient is generalized to two real or complex valued arguments using the gamma function or beta function via\nThis definition inherits these following additional properties from formula_193:\nmoreover,\nThe resulting function has been little-studied, apparently first being graphed in . Notably, many binomial identities fail: formula_196 but formula_196 for \"n\" positive (so formula_198 negative). The behavior is quite complex, and markedly different in various octants (that is, with respect to the \"x\" and \"y\" axes and the line formula_199), with the behavior for negative \"x\" having singularities at negative integer values and a checkerboard of positive and negative regions:\nGeneralization to \"q\"-series.\nThe binomial coefficient has a q-analog generalization known as the Gaussian binomial coefficient.\nGeneralization to infinite cardinals.\nThe definition of the binomial coefficient can be generalized to infinite cardinals by defining:\nwhere A is some set with cardinality formula_208. One can show that the generalized binomial coefficient is well-defined, in the sense that no matter what set we choose to represent the cardinal number formula_208, formula_210 will remain the same. For finite cardinals, this definition coincides with the standard definition of the binomial coefficient.\nAssuming the Axiom of Choice, one can show that formula_211 for any infinite cardinal formula_208.\nBinomial coefficient in programming languages.\nThe notation formula_213 is convenient in handwriting but inconvenient for typewriters and computer terminals. Many programming languages do not offer a standard subroutine for computing the binomial coefficient, but for example both the APL programming language and the (related) J programming language use the exclamation mark: codice_1. The binomial coefficient is implemented in SciPy as \"scipy.special.comb\".\nNaive implementations of the factorial formula, such as the following snippet in Python:\nfrom math import factorial\ndef binomial_coefficient(n: int, k: int) -&gt; int:\n return factorial(n) // (factorial(k) * factorial(n - k))\nare very slow and are useless for calculating factorials of very high numbers (in languages such as C or Java they suffer from overflow errors because of this reason). A direct implementation of the multiplicative formula works well:\ndef binomial_coefficient(n: int, k: int) -&gt; int:\n if k &lt; 0 or k &gt; n:\n return 0\n if k == 0 or k == n:\n return 1\n k = min(k, n - k) # Take advantage of symmetry\n c = 1\n for i in range(k):\n c = c * (n - i) / (i + 1)\n return c\nPascal's rule provides a recursive definition which can also be implemented in Python, although it is less efficient:\ndef binomial_coefficient(n: int, k: int) -&gt; int:\n if k &lt; 0 or k &gt; n:\n return 0\n if k &gt; n - k: # Take advantage of symmetry\n k = n - k\n if k == 0 or n &lt;= 1:\n return 1\n return binomial_coefficient(n - 1, k) + binomial_coefficient(n - 1, k - 1)\nThe example mentioned above can be also written in functional style. The following Scheme example uses the recursive definition\nRational arithmetic can be easily avoided using integer division\nThe following implementation uses all these ideas\n (define (binomial-iter n k i prev)\n (if (&gt;= i k)\n prev\n (binomial-iter n k (+ i 1) (/ (* (- n i) prev) (+ i 1)))))\n (if (&lt; k (- n k))\n (binomial-iter n k 0 1)\n (binomial-iter n (- n k) 0 1)))\nWhen computing formula_216 in a language with fixed-length integers, the multiplication by formula_217 may overflow even when the result would fit. The overflow can be avoided by dividing first and fixing the result using the remainder:\nImplementation in the C language:\nunsigned long binomial(unsigned long n, unsigned long k) {\n unsigned long c = 1, i;\n if (k &gt; n-k) // take advantage of symmetry\n k = n-k;\n for (i = 1; i &lt;= k; i++, n--) {\n if (c/i &gt; UINT_MAX/n) // return 0 on overflow\n return 0;\n c = c / i * n + c % i * n / i; // split c * n / i into (c / i * i + c % i) * n / i\n \n return c;\nAnother way to compute the binomial coefficient when using large numbers is to recognize that\nwhere formula_220\u2009formula_221 denotes the natural logarithm of the gamma function at formula_136. It is a special function that is easily computed and is standard in some programming languages such as using \"log_gamma\" in Maxima, \"LogGamma\" in Mathematica, \"gammaln\" in MATLAB and Python's SciPy module, \"lngamma\" in PARI/GP or \"lgamma\" in C, R, and Julia. Roundoff error may cause the returned value to not be an integer."}
{"id": "4669", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4669", "title": "Bill Holbrook", "text": "Bill Holbrook (born 1958) is an American cartoonist and webcomic writer and artist, best known for his syndicated comic strip \"On the Fastrack\".\nBorn in Los Angeles, Holbrook grew up in Huntsville, Alabama, and began drawing at an early age. While majoring in illustration and visual design at Auburn University, Holbrook served as art director of the student newspaper, doing editorial cartoons and a weekly comic strip. At the same time, his work was being published in the \"Huntsville Times\" and the \"Monroe Journal\". After graduation in 1980, he joined the \"Atlanta Constitution\" as an editorial staff artist.\nDuring a 1982 visit to relatives on the West Coast, Holbrook met \"Peanuts\" creator, Charles Schulz. Following his advice and encouragement, Holbrook created a strip in the fall of that year about a college graduate working in a rundown diner. It did not stir syndicate interest, but what he learned on the strip helped him when he created \"On the Fastrack\".\nEleven days before \"On the Fastrack\" made its syndicated debut (March 19, 1984), Holbrook met Teri Peitso on a blind date. They were married on Pearl Harbor Day, 1985. They have two daughters, Chandler and Haviland. Peitso-Holbrook's novels have been nominated for both Edgar Awards and Agatha Awards. She is currently an assistant professor in literacy education at Georgia State University. The family lives in the Atlanta area.\nIn October 1989, Holbrook began his second strip, \"Safe Havens\", and his third strip, \"Kevin and Kell\" was launched in September 1995.\nComic strips.\nEvery week Holbrook writes the story line for the next three weeks for one of his strips and draws the next three weeks' worth of strips for another. In 2010, characters from \"On the Fastrack\" and \"Safe Havens\" began appearing in both strips."}
{"id": "4670", "revid": "21894337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4670", "title": "Bruce Campbell", "text": "Bruce Lorne Campbell (born June 22, 1958) is an American actor, voice actor, producer, writer and director. One of his best-known roles is Ash Williams in Sam Raimi's \"Evil Dead\" franchise, beginning with the 1978 short film \"Within the Woods\". He has starred in many low-budget cult films such as \"Crimewave\" (1985), \"Maniac Cop\" (1988), \"\" (1989), and \"Bubba Ho-Tep\" (2002).\nIn television, Campbell had lead roles in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" (1993\u201394) and \"Jack of All Trades\" (2000), and a recurring role as Autolycus, King of Thieves, in ' and ' (1995\u201399). He played Sam Axe on the USA Network series \"Burn Notice\" (2007\u201313) and reprised his role as Ash Williams on the Starz series \"Ash vs. Evil Dead\" (2015\u201318).\nCampbell started his directing career with \"Fanalysis\" (2002) and \"A Community Speaks\" (2004), and then with the horror comedy feature films \"Man with the Screaming Brain\" (2005) and \"My Name Is Bruce\" (2007), the latter being a spoof of his career. He can also be seen as the role of the father in \"The Escort\" (2015).\nEarly life.\nCampbell was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, the son of Joanne Louise (n\u00e9e Pickens), a homemaker, and Charles Newton Campbell (April 27, 1928 \u2013 November 3, 2004), who worked in advertising for 35 years in roles ranging from traveling billboard inspector to company vice-president, later teaching at nine colleges as an adjunct professor, and was also an actor and director in local theater.\nCampbell has an older brother, Don, and an older half-brother, Michael Rendine. He is of Scottish and English descent.\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nCampbell began acting as a teenager and soon began making short Super 8 movies with friends. After he met Sam Raimi in Wylie E. Groves High School, the two became very good friends and started making movies together. Campbell would go on to attend Western Michigan University while he continued to work on his acting career. Campbell and Raimi collaborated on a 30-minute Super 8 version of the first \"Evil Dead\" film, titled \"Within the Woods\", which was initially used to attract investors.\nMajor film roles.\nA few years later, Campbell and Raimi got together with family and friends and began work on \"The Evil Dead\". Campbell starred and worked behind the camera, receiving a \"co-executive producer\" credit. Raimi wrote, directed and edited, while fellow Michigander Rob Tapert was producer. Following an endorsement by horror writer Stephen King, the film slowly began to receive distribution. Four years following its original release, it became the number one movie in the UK. It then received distribution in the United States, spawning two sequels: \"Evil Dead II\" and \"Army of Darkness\".\nCampbell was also drawn in the Marvel Zombie comics as his character, Ash Williams. He is featured in five comics, all in the series \"Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness\". In them, he fights alongside the Marvel heroes against the heroes and people who have turned into zombies (deadites) while in search of the Necronomicon (Book of the Names of the Dead).\nHe has appeared in many of Raimi's films outside of the \"Evil Dead\" series, notably having cameos in the director's \"Spider-Man\" film series. Campbell also joined the cast in Raimi's \"Darkman\" and \"The Quick and the Dead\", though having no actual screen time in the latter film's theatrical cut.\nCampbell often takes on quirky roles, such as Elvis Presley in the film \"Bubba Ho-Tep\". Along with \"Bubba Ho-Tep\", he played a supporting role in \"Maniac Cop\" and \"Maniac Cop 2\", and spoofed his career in the self-directed \"My Name is Bruce.\"\nOther mainstream films for Campbell include supporting or featured roles in the Coen Brothers film \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", the Michael Crichton adaptation \"Congo\", the film version of \"McHale's Navy\", \"Escape From L.A.\" (the sequel to John Carpenter's \"Escape From New York\"), the Jim Carrey drama \"The Majestic\" and the 2005 Disney film \"Sky High\".\nCampbell had a starring voice role in the hit 2009 animated adaptation of the children's book \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\", and a supporting voice role in Pixar's \"Cars 2\".\nIn January 2010, he stated in an interview that his new film project is called \"Bruce vs. Frankenstein\"., a sequel to \"My Name is Bruce\". The film would have been directed and produced by his friend Mike Richardson. It was later cancelled.\nCampbell produced the remake of \"The Evil Dead\", along with Raimi and Rob Tapert. Campbell made an appearance that may allude to his signature character, Ash, with the expectation he would reprise that role in \"Army of Darkness 2\". In a later interview with TV personality Erin Ashley Darling, Campbell announced that \"Army of Darkness 2\" is not happening, saying \"It's all internet B.S. There's no reality whatsoever. These random comments slip out of either my mouth, or Sam Raimi's mouth, next thing you know, we're making a sequel.\" In September 2017, during a panel at Fan Expo Canada, when asked if audiences could expect 4th \"Evil Dead\" film, Campbell said \"Everybody says Evil Dead 4! Evil Dead 4! You know, if we did an Evil Dead 4, Sam Raimi would spend $200 million on it, and it would bomb.\", elaborating that the only future for \"Evil Dead\" is unrestricted distribution via a premium cable network, as \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" is on Starz.\nTelevision roles.\nOutside of film, Campbell has appeared in a number of television series. He starred in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" a boisterous science fiction comedy western created by Jeffrey Boam and Carlton Cuse that ran for one season. He played a lawyer turned bounty hunter who was trying to hunt down John Bly, the man who killed his father. He starred in the television series \"Jack of All Trades\", set on a fictional island occupied by the French in 1801. Campbell was also credited as co-executive producer, among others. The show was directed by Eric Gruendemann, and was produced by various people, including Sam Raimi. The show aired for two seasons, from 2000 to 2001. He had a recurring role as \"Bill Church Jr.\" based upon the character of Morgan Edge from the Superman comics on \"\".\nFrom 1996 to 1997, Campbell was a recurring guest star on the show \"Ellen\" as Ed Billik, who becomes Ellen's boss when she sells her bookstore in season four.\nHe is also known for his supporting role as the recurring character Autolycus (\"King of Thieves\") on both ' and ', which reunited him with producer Rob Tapert. Campbell played \"Hercules\"/\"Xena\" series producer Tapert in two episodes of \"Hercules\" set in the present. He directed a number of episodes of \"Hercules\" and \"Xena\", including the \"Hercules\" series finale.\nCampbell also landed the lead role of race car driver Hank Cooper in the Disney made-for-television remake of \"The Love Bug\".\nCampbell made a critically acclaimed dramatic guest role as a grief-stricken detective seeking revenge for his father's murder in a two-part episode of the fourth season of \"\". Campbell later played the part of a bigamous demon in \"The X-Files\" episode \"Terms of Endearment\". He also starred as Agent Jackman in the episode \"Witch Way Now?\" of the WB series \"Charmed\", as well as playing a state police officer in an episode of the short-lived series \"American Gothic\" titled \"Meet the Beetles\".\nCampbell co-starred on the television series \"Burn Notice\", which aired from 2007 to 2013 on USA Network. He portrayed Sam Axe, a beer-chugging, former Navy SEAL now working as an unlicensed private investigator and occasional mercenary with his old friend Michael Westen, the show's main character. When working undercover, his character frequently used the alias Chuck Finley, which Bruce later revealed was the name of one of his father's old co-workers. Campbell was the star of a 2011 \"Burn Notice\" made-for-television prequel focusing on Sam's Navy SEAL career, titled \"\".\nIn 2014, Campbell played Santa Claus in an episode of \"The Librarians\". Campbell played Ronald Reagan in season 2 of the FX original series \"Fargo\". More recently Campbell reprised his role as Ashley \"Ash\" Williams in \"Ash vs Evil Dead\", a series based upon the \"Evil Dead\" franchise that launched his career. \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" began airing on Starz on October 31, 2015, and was renewed by the cable channel for second and third seasons, before being cancelled.\nIn January 2019, Travel Channel announced a reboot of the \"Ripley's Believe It or Not!\" reality series, with Bruce Campbell serving as host and executive producer. The 10-episode season debuted on June 9, 2019.\nVoice acting.\nCampbell is featured as a voice actor in several video game titles. He provides the voice of Ash in the three games based on the \"Evil Dead\" film series: ', ' and '. He also provided voice talent in other titles such as ', \"Spider-Man: The Movie\", \"Spider-Man 2\", \"Spider-Man 3\", \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", and Dead by Daylight.\nHe provided the voice of main character Jake Logan in the PC title, ', the voice of main character Jake Burton in the PlayStation game \"Broken Helix\" and the voice of Magnanimous in \"Megas XLR\". Campbell voiced the pulp adventurer Lobster Johnson in ' and has done voice-over work for the Codemaster's game \"Hei$t\", a game which was announced on January 28, 2010 to have been \"terminated\". He also provided the voice of The Mayor in the 2009 film \"Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs\", the voice of Rod \"Torque\" Redline in \"Cars 2\" and the voice of \"Fugax\" in the 2006 film \"The Ant Bully\".\nDespite the inclusion of his character \"Ash Williams\" in Telltale Games' \"Poker Night 2\", Danny Webber voices the character in the game, instead of Bruce Campbell.\nHe has a voice in the online MOBA game, \"Tome: Immortal Arena\" in 2014. Campbell also provided voice-over and motion capture for Sgt. Lennox in the Exo Zombies mode of \"\".\nWriting.\nIn addition to acting and occasionally directing, Campbell has become a writer, starting with an autobiography, \"If Chins Could Kill: Confessions of a B Movie Actor\", published in June of 2001. The autobiography was a successful \"New York Times\" Best Seller. The paperback version of the book adds a chapter about the reaction of fans at book signings.\n\"Whenever I do mainstream stuff, I think they're pseudo-interested, but they're still interested in seeing weirdo, offbeat stuff, and that's what I'm attracted to\".\n\"If Chins Could Kill\" follows Campbell's career to date as an actor in low-budget films and television, providing his insight into \"Blue-Collar Hollywood\".\nCampbell's next book, \"Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way\" was published on May 26, 2005. The book's plot involves Bruce (depicted in a comical way) as the main character struggling to make it into the world of A-list movies. He later recorded an audio play adaptation of \"Make Love\" with fellow Michigan actors, including longtime collaborator Ted Raimi. This radio drama was released through the independent label Rykodisc and spans 6 discs with a 6-hour running time.\nIn addition to his books, Campbell also wrote a column for \"X Ray Magazine\" in 2001, an issue of the popular comic series \"The Hire\", and comic book adaptations of his \"Man with the Screaming Brain\". Most recently he wrote the introduction to Josh Becker's \"The Complete Guide to Low-Budget Feature Filmmaking\".\nIn late 2016, Campbell announced that he would be releasing a third book, \"Hail to the Chin: Further Confessions of a B Movie Actor,\" which will detail his life from where \"If Chins Could Kill\" left off. \"Hail to the Chin\" was released in August 2017, and accompanied by a book tour across the United States and Europe.\nCampbell maintained a blog on his official website, where he posted mainly about politics and the film industry. The blog has since been discontinued.\nBruce Campbell Horror Film Festival.\nSince 2014, the Bruce Campbell Horror Film Festival, narrated and organized by Campbell, has been held in the Muvico Theater in Rosemont, Illinois. The first festival had his original run from August 21 to 25, 2014 presented by Wizard World, as part of the Chicago Comicon. The second festival ran from August 20 to 23, 2015, with the guests Tom Holland and Eli Roth. The third festival took place over four days in August 2016. Guests of the event were Sam Raimi, Robert Tapert and Doug Benson.\nPersonal life.\nCampbell's first wife was Christine Deveau, whom he married in 1983. They had two children, Rebecca and Andy, before their divorce in 1989. Campbell currently lives in Jacksonville, Oregon, with his second wife, costume designer Ida Gearon, whom he met on the set of the movie \"Mindwarp\".\nCampbell is also an ordained minister and has officiated weddings for couples."}
{"id": "4671", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4671", "title": "Baron Aberdare", "text": "Baron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 23 August 1873 for the Liberal politician Henry Bruce. He served as Home Secretary from 1868 to 1873. His grandson, the third Baron, was a soldier, cricketer and tennis player and a member of the International Olympic Committee. His son, the fourth Baron, held office in the Conservative administration of Edward Heath and was later a Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. Lord Aberdare was one of the ninety-two elected hereditary peers that were allowed to remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999. the title is held by his son, the fifth Baron, who succeeded in 2005 and was elected to the House of Lords in 2009.\nCoat of arms.\nThe heraldic blazon for the coat of arms of the family is: \"Or, a saltire gules, on a chief of the last a martlet of the field\".\nBarons Aberdare (1873).\nThe heir apparent is the present holder's son the Hon Hector Morys Napier Bruce (b. 1974)&lt;br&gt;\nThe heir apparent's heir is the present holder's younger brother the Hon. James Henry Morys Bruce (b. 1948)&lt;br&gt;\nThe heir apparent's heir's heir is his son Robert Algernon Copley Bruce (b. 1994)"}
{"id": "4673", "revid": "35490007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4673", "title": "Boy band", "text": "A boy band (or boyband) is loosely defined as a vocal group consisting of young male singers, usually in their teenage years or in their twenties at the time of formation, singing love songs marketed towards young women. Many boy bands dance as well as sing, usually giving highly choreographed performances.\nSome such bands form on their own. They can evolve out of church choral or gospel music groups, but are often created by talent managers or record producers who hold auditions. Due to this and their general commercial orientation towards a female audience of preteens, teenyboppers, or teens, the term can be pejorative in music journalism. Boy bands are similar in concept to their counterparts, girl groups. Boy bands' popularity peaked four times: in the 1960s (e.g., the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds), in the 1990s and early 2000s when acts such as the Take That, Backstreet Boys, *NSYNC, Boyzone, F4, and Westlife, among others, dominated global pop charts like the American \"Billboard\", in the early 2010s with the emergence of popular new boy bands such as Big Time Rush, One Direction, and K-pop acts like BTS, Exo, Seventeen and NCT, and in the late 2010s with pop groups such as CNCO, Why Don't We and PrettyMuch.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest forerunner of boy band music began in the late 19th century as a cappella barbershop quartets. They were usually a group of males and sang in four-part harmonies. Barbershop quartets were popular into the earlier part of the 20th century. A revival of the male vocal group took place in the late 1940s and 1950s with the use of doo-wop music. Doo-wop bands sang about topics such as love and other themes used in pop music. The earliest traces of boy bands were in the mid-1950s although the term boy band was not used. African American vocal group The Ink Spots was one of the first of what would now be called boy bands. The term boy band was not established until the late 1980s as before that they were called male vocal groups or \"hep harmony singing groups\".\nAlthough generally described as a rock band, the highest-selling band in history The Beatles are considered by a number of journalists as \"the first\" or \"the original\" boyband, \"before anyone had thought of the term.\"\nThe Beatles inspired the production of the 1966 television series \"The Monkees\", which spawned the music group of the same name, formed by the four starring actors. The rock and pop band started a career in music after their songs from the TV series were released as successful records.\nLate 1960s and 1970s: The Jackson 5 and the Osmonds.\nAlthough the term \"boy band\" was not commonly used then, the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds which helped form the template for boy bands. The Jackson 5 were a siblings group that established many musical conventions that boy bands follow. For instance, their music featured close harmonies from soul music and catchy pop hooks influenced as much as they were by Motown and acts like the Supremes. The group also incorporated choreographed dance moves to their performances. All members of the band sang, which is a common convention of a boy band, as opposed to having a front man and the rest on instruments; thus, no one person dominated the stage. Also a siblings group, The Osmonds first started singing barbershop music for local audiences, before being hired to perform at Disneyland early in their career. Their appearance in a televised Disney special earned them additional TV spots, such as \"The Andy Williams Show\" and \"The Jerry Lewis Show\".\nLate 1970s and 1980s: Menudo, New Edition, and New Kids on the Block.\nOther antecedents (apart from those already mentioned) exist throughout the history of pop music. The genre has been copied into languages and cultures other than the Anglo-American. The Puerto Rican boy band Menudo, appealing to young Latina audiences, was founded in 1977. Menudo had a convention unique among boy bands: when a member turned 16, became too tall, or their voice changed, they were replaced. The members of Menudo were generally aged 12\u201316.\nThe Bay City Rollers were a Scottish pop band who were most popular in the mid-1970s. The \"British Hit Singles &amp; Albums\" noted that they were \"tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh\", and were \"the first of many acts heralded as the 'Biggest Group since The Beatles' and one of the most screamed-at teeny-bopper acts of the 1970s\". For a fairly brief but fervent period (nicknamed \"Rollermania\"), they were worldwide teen idols. The group were one of the first bands, like The Monkees before them, to take the formula shown by The Beatles and apply it to a teen market. The group achieved the same amount of success but for a limited period of time. At the peak of their popularity in the UK, comparisons were being made to The Beatles. Also by this time, Bay City Roller fans had a completely distinctive style of dress, the main elements of which were ankle-length tartan trousers and tartan scarves, the group using the benefit of merchandise and promotion.\nThe German boy band \"The Teens\" formed in West Berlin 1976 and had a couple of hits targeting young females. The band resolved in 1982.\nIn the US, the Cleveland-based power pop group Raspberries was generally interpreted as a \"teen act\", although all the band members played their own music. Vocalist Eric Carmen later commented, \"It was not hip for people to like us, because their little sister liked us.\"\nBoston group New Edition was formed in 1978 and reached their height of popularity in the 1980s, meaning they are often credited for starting the boy-band trend, even though the term \"boy band\" did not exist until the 1990s. Maurice Starr was influenced by New Edition and popularized it with his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 New Kids on the Block, the first commercially successful modern boy band, who formed in 1984 and found international success in 1988. Starr's idea was to take the traditional template from the R&amp;B genre (in this case his teenage band New Edition) and apply it to a pop genre.\nBros (abbreviation of the word \"brothers\") were a British boy band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, consisting of twin brothers Matt and Luke Goss along with Craig Logan. Formed in 1986, they scored multiple top 10 hits between 1987 and 1989 and in 1988 became the first modern era\u2013style boy band to have a multiple platinum-selling album in the UK, with \"Push\", still one of the most successful boy-band albums in the UK. Other big boy bands in Britain during the late 1980s were Big Fun and Brother Beyond.\n1990s: Boyz II Men, Take That, Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, and Westlife.\nSome managers in Europe soon created their own acts after being inspired by New Kids on the Block, beginning with Nigel Martin-Smith's Take That in the UK (formed in 1990) and followed by Tom Watkins, who had success with Bros in the late 1980s and formed East 17 in 1991. Bros were marketed and pitted against Take That as rivals with a harsher attitude, style and sound. Since reforming in 2006 after a decade-long hiatus, Take That have become one of the most successful groups in British music chart history and their albums and singles have also charted internationally, especially in Europe. Irish music manager Louis Walsh, who had witnessed the impact of these British boy bands, put out an advert for an \"Irish Take That\", thereby creating Boyzone in 1993. Let Loose (formed in 1993), MN8 and 911 (formed in 1995), and Damage (formed in 1996) were also successful boy bands in Britain; however, by the late 1990s all these bands had run their course and split up.\nAll these artists were very successful on both the singles and albums charts domestically and internationally; however, with the emergence of Britpop and the commercial co-option of indie rock, many boy bands were ridiculed by the British music press as having no artistic credibility, although some, such as East 17 and Take That, did write most of their own material. The media attention was then placed on the \"Battle of Britpop\", and the bands Oasis and Blur replaced the importance and rivalry of Take That and East 17 as the two new biggest bands in Britain. However, boy bands continued to find success in the late 1990s, such as Five, Another Level, Point Break and Westlife. In 1995 successful German music manager Frank Farian, who had been manager of Boney M and Milli Vanilli, put together Latin American band No Mercy who scored a few worldwide hits during the mid-90s.\nAlthough being American and the sons of Tito Jackson, a member of The Jackson 5, 3T had several hits singles across Europe in the mid-1990s, despite limited success in the US, and finished the second biggest selling act of 1996 in Europe behind the Spice Girls. With the success of North American boy bands like New Kids on the Block in East Asia, Japanese entertainment company Johnny &amp; Associates formed SMAP in 1992. The group enjoyed tremendous success, selling over 35 million records. It paved the way for more Asian boy bands such as Arashi.\nIn the early 1990s in North America, with New Kids on the Block's continued success and Color Me Badd also having success, boy bands became a continued staple of the Billboard charts. Continuing this success in the mid-1990s, most prominent boy bands were African American and had R&amp;B and gospel elements, such as the groups All-4-One (formed in 1993) and Boyz II Men (formed in 1988). Boyz II Men are also the most successful boy band act on the U.S. Hot 100 as well as the Australian Singles Chart. Although they had success on the Billboard charts, they were not marketed towards youth but more towards adults. It was not until 1997 and the change to pop-oriented groups such as Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, NSYNC, The Moffatts, and Hanson that boy bands exploded commercially and dominated the market in the United States. This late 1990s marked the height of boy band popularity in North America, which has not been seen since.\nArguably the most successful boy band manager from the U.S. was Lou Pearlman, who founded commercially successful acts such as the Backstreet Boys in 1993, NSYNC and LFO in 1995, O-Town in 2000, and US5 in 2005. Backstreet Boys and NSYNC became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s until the early 2000s, and Backstreet Boys went on to become the best-selling boy band in history with over 100 million records sold.\nIn the late 1990s in the UK, producer Simon Cowell (noted in the U.S. for the \"American Idol/X Factor\" franchise) is also known for having managed British boyband Five (formed in 1997) and Irish boyband Westlife (formed in 1998). Westlife was created by Irishman Louis Walsh as a replacement for Boyzone and was initially managed by a former member of the band Ronan Keating. Westlife would eventually overtake Take That in number one's tally in the UK although Take That's overall UK sales are still higher. In 2012, the Official Charts Company revealed the biggest selling singles artists in British music chart history with Take That placed 15th overall and the highest selling boyband act (9.3 million), followed by Boyzone at 29 (7.1 million) and Westlife at 34 (6.8 million). Even though Cowell is known to have managed several successful boy bands, he is also infamous for passing on signing two of the biggest boybands to emerge from the 1990s and 2000s, Take That and Busted.\n2000s: Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, Westlife, Jonas Brothers and F4.\nWith the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Westlife, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone (better known today as an Internet meme), and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.\nAt the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like The Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act composed of actors. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb.\nSince 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade in the western hemisphere, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described \"new boy bands\" that are \"more likely to resemble My Chemical Romance, Sum 41, and Simple Plan.\nIn 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama Meteor Garden. According to \"Forbes\", F4 has sold 3.5 million copies of their first two albums all over Asia as of July 2003.\nWith their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group's label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who had 13 members at its peak.\nJapanese boy band Arashi has sold over 30 million copies of their records since their first release in 1999. They had the yearly best-selling single in Japan in 2008 and 2009. In 2003 SMAP released the single \"Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana\" that has become the third best-selling single ever in Japan, with over 3 million copies sold.\nIn North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel in 2008. Other boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also emerged and experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands have not seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.\nThe mid 2000s, especially the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe, saw the continued longevity of nineties boy bands such as Backstreet Boys and Westlife (before they disbanded in 2012), and the successful comeback of Take That in 2005, Boyzone in 2007, and New Kids on the Block in 2008. Some sections of the press have referred to these acts, particularly those who have reformed after a previous split, such as Take That, Boyzone, and 98 Degrees, as 'man bands'.\n2010s: Big Time Rush, One Direction and rise of K-pop.\nIn the early 2010s, there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained, with the emergence of new boy bands like Big Time Rush, The Wanted, and One Direction and the formation of supergroup NKOTBSB which comprised members of New Kids on the Block and Backstreet Boys. NKOTBSB's success inspired boy bands who were fairly popular during the 1990s and 2000s to make a comeback, such as A1, Blue, 98 Degrees, Five, 911, and O-Town. Like 2gether and The Monkees, Big Time Rush was a manufactured act created for a television show. One Direction were often credited as sparking a resurgence in the popularity and interest boy bands alongside being credited with forming part of a new \"British Invasion\" in the United States. Their Where We Are Tour was the highest-grossing tour by a vocal group in history and after the release of their fourth album, \"Four\", they became the only group in the 58-year history of the \"Billboard\" 200 to have their first four albums debut at number one.\nIn Southeast Asia, local boy bands also emerged as a result of the continued success of Korean and Japanese boy bands such as SMAP, Shinhwa, TVXQ!, Arashi, Exile, Super Junior, Big Bang, SHINee, Exo, and BTS. One of the boy bands who emerged as a result of Hallyu (Korean wave) is Indonesia's SM*SH who enjoyed prominent success domestically. In the Philippines, a major boy band has been formed by bringing the first reality boy band search of the country called Pinoy Boyband Superstar which held mid 2016, after all the series of auditions, rigorous training and competition, the winners formed as a group called Boyband PH a five-piece Pinoy boy band which managed by Star Magic\nIn South Korea, boy bands have been commercially successful. On the Gaon Music Chart year-end albums chart of 2016, nine of the top 10 and 17 of the top 20 albums are by boy bands or by subunits/members of boy bands. BTS' is the best-selling album of all time in South Korea, with more than 4.4 million copies sold, and Exo's XOXO became the first album released since 2001 to sell more than 1 million copies. As of 2021, boy bands such as Seventeen, NCT and NCT 127 have also become regular million-sellers.\nIn 2013 Billboard started covering music releases in K-pop, though K-pop had been entering the charts as early as 2009, signifying the growth of the hallyu wave in America. By 2017, BTS crossed into the international music market, furthering the Korean Wave in the United States and becoming the first Korean group to receive a certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) with their single \"Mic Drop\". The band is the first Korean act to top the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 with their studio album ' (2018) and have since hit the top of the U.S. charts with their albums ' (2018), ' (2019), ' (2020) and \"Be\" (2020). \"Love Yourself: Answer\" also broke South Korea's Gaon Album Chart's all-time monthly record previously set by \"Love Yourself: Tear\" and became the first Korean album certified Gold in the United States. SuperM later became the first K-pop group to debut at #1 in the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200.\nIn Japan, Arashi continue to be very successful, being the best-selling music artist in Japan from 2013 through 2017 by value of sales and also having the yearly best-selling album in the country in 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2016. Other successful Japanese boy bands in this decade include Sandaime J Soul Brothers, the second best-selling music artist of 2016 in the country and Kanjani Eight, the fifth best-selling music artist of that year in Japan.\nKey factors of the concept.\nSeen as important to a \"boy band\" group's commercial success is the group's image, carefully controlled by managing all aspects of the group's attire, promotional materials (which are frequently supplied to teen magazines), and music videos. The key factor of a boy band is being trendy. This means that the band conforms to the most recent fashion and musical trends in the popular music scene. Typically, each member of the group will have some distinguishing feature and be portrayed as having a particular personality stereotype, such as \"the baby,\" \"the bad boy,\" or \"the shy one.\" While managing the portrayal of popular musicians is as old as popular music, the particular pigeonholing of band members is a defining characteristic of boy and girl bands.\nIn most cases, their music is written, arranged and produced by a producer who works with the band at all times and controls the group's sound \u2013 if necessary, to the point of hiring session singers to record guide vocals for each member of the group to sing individually if the members cannot harmonize well together. However, for clarity of each voice, recording each voice individually is most commonly the norm with most modern vocal groups. In recent years, auto-tune has become a popular tool for boy bands who are unable to sing to a high standard. Some boy bands have come under fire for this issue of using auto-tune. Some have also come under fire for lip syncing in their performances as well, for example New Kids on the Block.\nA typical boy band performance features elaborately choreographed dancing, with the members taking turns singing and/or rapping. Boy bands generally do not compose or produce their own material, unless the members lobby hard enough for creative control. However, some bands were created around the talent of a songwriter within the group like Gary Barlow of Take That or Tony Mortimer of East 17. It is not uncommon to find extra songs on an album written by one or more of the band members; however, their producers rarely use these as singles.\nSince the 21st century, however, boy bands have been expected to write or at least contribute in some part lyrically to songs. Apart from the groups mentioned above who all had at least one primary songwriter from their beginning, other groups soon caught up. From the late nineties, members of Backstreet Boys who had previously used writers like Max Martin during their early albums began writing their own songs. Newer groups from late 2000s such as JLS have all made a point from early interviews that they write their own songs and hold their own image as this is an important part of marketing. Some bands like The Wanted have even spent time learning the craft of songwriting.\nIndividuals can also go on to achieve greater success as a solo artist coming out of a boy band having used the groups popularity to build on. Usually this signals the end of the group until potential future reunions. Examples of this include Michael Jackson from The Jackson 5, Donny Osmond from The Osmonds, Ricky Martin from Menudo, Justin Timberlake from *NSYNC, and Ronan Keating from Boyzone. Sometimes the most successful solo star from a band is not the most popular member such as Robbie Williams as opposed to lead singer Gary Barlow from Take That. Some boy band members have gone on to successful careers elsewhere in the media. Michael Dolenz of The Monkees went on to become a successful television producer, working for ITV franchises such as LWT and Television South.\nMusic genres.\nAlthough most boy bands consist of R&amp;B or pop influences, other music genres, most notably country music and folk music, are also represented. South 65 and Marshall Dyllon, for example, were both country music boy bands. Il Divo, created by Simon Cowell in 2004, are a vocal group that performs operatic pop in several (mainly Italian) languages. Since then operatic/classical boy bands have become quite popular and common, especially in the UK. Since 2001 there has been some crossover with power pop and pop punk from bands that play live instruments. Just recently some boy bands decided to go back to their original doo-wop roots, most notably, The Overtones.\nControversy.\nSince the 2000s, groups such as Backstreet Boys and LFO have disliked the term \"boy band\" and have preferred to be known as a \"male vocal group\". Being categorized among boy bands was also the main reason The Moffatts split up. Boy bands have been accused by the music press of emphasizing the appearance and marketing of the group above the quality of music, deliberately trying to appeal to a preteen audience and for conforming to trends instead of being original. Such criticisms can become extremely scathing. Boy bands are often seen as being short lived, although some acts such as The Jackson 5, Backstreet Boys, Human Nature, New Edition, SMAP, Shinhwa and Westlife (before they split up in 2012) have sustained lasting careers.\nBest-selling boy bands.\nThe following is a list of the best-selling boy bands based on claimed sales figures of over 40 million records:"}
{"id": "4674", "revid": "30707369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4674", "title": "B-tree", "text": "In computer science, a B-tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that maintains sorted data and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time. The B-tree generalizes the binary search tree, allowing for nodes with more than two children. Unlike other self-balancing binary search trees, the B-tree is well suited for storage systems that read and write relatively large blocks of data, such as disks. It is commonly used in databases and file systems.\nOrigin.\nB-trees were invented by Rudolf Bayer and Edward M.McCreight while working at Boeing Research Labs, for the purpose of efficiently managing index pages for large random access files. The basic assumption was that indexes would be so voluminous that only small chunks of the tree could fit in main memory. Bayer and McCreight's paper, \"Organization and maintenance of large ordered indices\", was first circulated in July 1970 and later published in \"Acta Informatica\".\nBayer and McCreight never explained what, if anything, the \"B\" stands for: \"Boeing\", \"balanced\", \"broad\", \"bushy\", and \"Bayer\" have been suggested. McCreight has said that \"the more you think about what the B in B-trees means, the better you understand B-trees.\"\nDefinition.\nAccording to Knuth's definition, a B-tree of order \"m\" is a tree which satisfies the following properties:\nEach internal node's keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: \"a\"1 and \"a\"2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than \"a\"1, all values in the middle subtree will be between \"a\"1 and \"a\"2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than \"a\"2.\nA B-tree of depth \"n\"+1 can hold about \"U\" times as many items as a B-tree of depth \"n\", but the cost of search, insert, and delete operations grows with the depth of the tree. As with any balanced tree, the cost grows much more slowly than the number of elements.\nSome balanced trees store values only at leaf nodes, and use different kinds of nodes for leaf nodes and internal nodes. B-trees keep values in every node in the tree except leaf nodes.\nDifferences in terminology.\nThe literature on B-trees is not uniform in its terminology.\nBayer and McCreight (1972), Comer (1979), and others define the order of B-tree as the minimum number of keys in a non-root node. points out that terminology is ambiguous because the maximum number of keys is not clear. An order 3 B-tree might hold a maximum of 6 keys or a maximum of 7 keys. Knuth (1998) avoids the problem by defining the order to be the maximum number of children (which is one more than the maximum number of keys).\nThe term leaf is also inconsistent. Bayer and McCreight (1972) considered the leaf level to be the lowest level of keys, but Knuth considered the leaf level to be one level below the lowest keys. There are many possible implementation choices. In some designs, the leaves may hold the entire data record; in other designs, the leaves may only hold pointers to the data record. Those choices are not fundamental to the idea of a B-tree.\nFor simplicity, most authors assume there are a fixed number of keys that fit in a node. The basic assumption is the key size is fixed and the node size is fixed. In practice, variable length keys may be employed.\nInformal description.\nIn B-trees, internal (non-leaf) nodes can have a variable number of child nodes within some pre-defined range. When data is inserted or removed from a node, its number of child nodes changes. In order to maintain the pre-defined range, internal nodes may be joined or split. Because a range of child nodes is permitted, B-trees do not need re-balancing as frequently as other self-balancing search trees, but may waste some space, since nodes are not entirely full. The lower and upper bounds on the number of child nodes are typically fixed for a particular implementation. For example, in a 2\u20133 tree (sometimes referred to as a 2\u20133 B-tree), each internal node may have only 2 or 3 child nodes.\nEach internal node of a B-tree contains a number of keys. The keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: formula_1 and formula_2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than formula_1, all values in the middle subtree will be between formula_1 and formula_2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than formula_2.\nUsually, the number of keys is chosen to vary between formula_7 and formula_8, where formula_7 is the minimum number of keys, and formula_10 is the minimum degree or branching factor of the tree. In practice, the keys take up the most space in a node. The factor of 2 will guarantee that nodes can be split or combined. If an internal node has formula_8 keys, then adding a key to that node can be accomplished by splitting the hypothetical formula_12 key node into two formula_7 key nodes and moving the key that would have been in the middle to the parent node. Each split node has the required minimum number of keys. Similarly, if an internal node and its neighbor each have formula_7 keys, then a key may be deleted from the internal node by combining it with its neighbor. Deleting the key would make the internal node have formula_15 keys; joining the neighbor would add formula_7 keys plus one more key brought down from the neighbor's parent. The result is an entirely full node of formula_8 keys.\nThe number of branches (or child nodes) from a node will be one more than the number of keys stored in the node. In a 2-3 B-tree, the internal nodes will store either one key (with two child nodes) or two keys (with three child nodes). A B-tree is sometimes described with the parameters formula_18\u2014formula_19 or simply with the highest branching order, formula_19.\nA B-tree is kept balanced after insertion by splitting a would-be overfilled node, of formula_12 keys, into two formula_7-key siblings and inserting the mid-value key into the parent. Depth only increases when the root is split, maintaining balance. Similarly, a B-tree is kept balanced after deletion by merging or redistributing keys among siblings to maintain the formula_7-key minimum for non-root nodes. A merger reduces the number of keys in the parent potentially forcing it to merge or redistribute keys with its siblings, and so on. The only change in depth occurs when the root has two children, of formula_7 and (transitionally) formula_15 keys, in which case the two siblings and parent are merged, reducing the depth by one.\nThis depth will increase slowly as elements are added to the tree, but an increase in the overall depth is infrequent, and results in all leaf nodes being one more node farther away from the root.\nB-trees have substantial advantages over alternative implementations when the time to access the data of a node greatly exceeds the time spent processing that data, because then the cost of accessing the node may be amortized over multiple operations within the node. This usually occurs when the node data are in secondary storage such as disk drives. By maximizing the number of keys within each internal node, the height of the tree decreases and the number of expensive node accesses is reduced. In addition, rebalancing of the tree occurs less often. The maximum number of child nodes depends on the information that must be stored for each child node and the size of a full disk block or an analogous size in secondary storage. While 2-3 B-trees are easier to explain, practical B-trees using secondary storage need a large number of child nodes to improve performance.\nVariants.\nThe term B-tree may refer to a specific design or it may refer to a general class of designs. In the narrow sense, a B-tree stores keys in its internal nodes but need not store those keys in the records at the leaves. The general class includes variations such as the B+ tree and the B* tree.\nB-tree usage in databases.\nTime to search a sorted file.\nUsually, sorting and searching algorithms have been characterized by the number of comparison operations that must be performed using order notation. A binary search of a sorted table with records, for example, can be done in roughly comparisons. If the table had 1,000,000 records, then a specific record could be located with at most 20 comparisons: .\nLarge databases have historically been kept on disk drives. The time to read a record on a disk drive far exceeds the time needed to compare keys once the record is available. The time to read a record from a disk drive involves a seek time and a rotational delay. The seek time may be 0 to 20 or more milliseconds, and the rotational delay averages about half the rotation period. For a 7200 RPM drive, the rotation period is 8.33 milliseconds. For a drive such as the Seagate ST3500320NS, the track-to-track seek time is 0.8 milliseconds and the average reading seek time is 8.5 milliseconds. For simplicity, assume reading from disk takes about 10 milliseconds.\nNaively, then, the time to locate one record out of a million would take 20 disk reads times 10 milliseconds per disk read, which is 0.2 seconds.\nThe time won't be that bad because individual records are grouped together in a disk block. A disk block might be 16 kilobytes. If each record is 160 bytes, then 100 records could be stored in each block. The disk read time above was actually for an entire block. Once the disk head is in position, one or more disk blocks can be read with little delay. With 100 records per block, the last 6 or so comparisons don't need to do any disk reads\u2014the comparisons are all within the last disk block read.\nTo speed the search further, the first 13 to 14 comparisons (which each required a disk access) must be sped up.\nAn index speeds the search.\nA significant improvement can be made with an index. In the example above, initial disk reads narrowed the search range by a factor of two. That can be improved substantially by creating an auxiliary index that contains the first record in each disk block (sometimes called a sparse index). This auxiliary index would be 1% of the size of the original database, but it can be searched more quickly. Finding an entry in the auxiliary index would tell us which block to search in the main database; after searching the auxiliary index, we would have to search only that one block of the main database\u2014at a cost of one more disk read. The index would hold 10,000 entries, so it would take at most 14 comparisons. Like the main database, the last six or so comparisons in the auxiliary index would be on the same disk block. The index could be searched in about eight disk reads, and the desired record could be accessed in 9 disk reads.\nThe trick of creating an auxiliary index can be repeated to make an auxiliary index to the auxiliary index. That would make an aux-aux index that would need only 100 entries and would fit in one disk block.\nInstead of reading 14 disk blocks to find the desired record, we only need to read 3 blocks. This blocking is the core idea behind the creation of the B-tree, where the disk blocks fill-out a hierarchy of levels to make up the index. Reading and searching the first (and only) block of the aux-aux index which is the root of the tree identifies the relevant block in aux-index in the level below. Reading and searching that aux-index block identifies the relevant block to read, until the final level, known as the leaf level, identifies a record in the main database. Instead of 150 milliseconds, we need only 30 milliseconds to get the record.\nThe auxiliary indices have turned the search problem from a binary search requiring roughly disk reads to one requiring only disk reads where is the blocking factor (the number of entries per block: entries per block in our example; reads).\nIn practice, if the main database is being frequently searched, the aux-aux index and much of the aux index may reside in a disk cache, so they would not incur a disk read. The B-tree remains the standard index implementation in almost all relational databases, and many nonrelational databases use them too.\nInsertions and deletions.\nIf the database does not change, then compiling the index is simple to do, and the index need never be changed. If there are changes, then managing the database and its index becomes more complicated.\nDeleting records from a database is relatively easy. The index can stay the same, and the record can just be marked as deleted. The database remains in sorted order. If there are a large number of deletions, then searching and storage become less efficient.\nInsertions can be very slow in a sorted sequential file because room for the inserted record must be made. Inserting a record before the first record requires shifting all of the records down one. Such an operation is just too expensive to be practical. One solution is to leave some spaces. Instead of densely packing all the records in a block, the block can have some free space to allow for subsequent insertions. Those spaces would be marked as if they were \"deleted\" records.\nBoth insertions and deletions are fast as long as space is available on a block. If an insertion won't fit on the block, then some free space on some nearby block must be found and the auxiliary indices adjusted. The hope is that enough space is available nearby, such that a lot of blocks do not need to be reorganized. Alternatively, some out-of-sequence disk blocks may be used.\nAdvantages of B-tree usage for databases.\nThe B-tree uses all of the ideas described above. In particular, a B-tree:\nIn addition, a B-tree minimizes waste by making sure the interior nodes are at least half full. A B-tree can handle an arbitrary number of insertions and deletions.\nBest case and worst case heights.\nLet be the height of the classic B-tree (see Tree (data structure) \u00a7 Terminology for the tree height definition). Let be the number of entries in the tree. Let \"m\" be the maximum number of children a node can have. Each node can have at most keys.\nIt can be shown (by induction for example) that a B-tree of height \"h\" with all its nodes completely filled has entries. Hence, the best case height (i.e. the minimum height) of a B-tree is:\nLet formula_7 be the minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node can have. For an ordinary B-tree, formula_28\nComer (1979) and Cormen et al. (2001) give the worst case height (the maximum height) of a B-tree as\nAlgorithms.\nSearch.\nSearching is similar to searching a binary search tree. Starting at the root, the tree is recursively traversed from top to bottom. At each level, the search reduces its field of view to the child pointer (subtree) whose range includes the search value. A subtree's range is defined by the values, or keys, contained in its parent node. These limiting values are also known as separation values.\nBinary search is typically (but not necessarily) used within nodes to find the separation values and child tree of interest.\nInsertion.\nAll insertions start at a leaf node. To insert a new element, search the tree to find the leaf node where the new element should be added. Insert the new element into that node with the following steps:\nIf the splitting goes all the way up to the root, it creates a new root with a single separator value and two children, which is why the lower bound on the size of internal nodes does not apply to the root. The maximum number of elements per node is \"U\"\u22121. When a node is split, one element moves to the parent, but one element is added. So, it must be possible to divide the maximum number \"U\"\u22121 of elements into two legal nodes. If this number is odd, then \"U\"=2\"L\" and one of the new nodes contains (\"U\"\u22122)/2 = \"L\"\u22121 elements, and hence is a legal node, and the other contains one more element, and hence it is legal too. If \"U\"\u22121 is even, then \"U\"=2\"L\"\u22121, so there are 2\"L\"\u22122 elements in the node. Half of this number is \"L\"\u22121, which is the minimum number of elements allowed per node.\nAn alternative algorithm supports a single pass down the tree from the root to the node where the insertion will take place, splitting any full nodes encountered on the way preemptively. This prevents the need to recall the parent nodes into memory, which may be expensive if the nodes are on secondary storage. However, to use this algorithm, we must be able to send one element to the parent and split the remaining \"U\"\u22122 elements into two legal nodes, without adding a new element. This requires \"U\" = 2\"L\" rather than \"U\" = 2\"L\"\u22121, which accounts for why some textbooks impose this requirement in defining B-trees.\nDeletion.\nThere are two popular strategies for deletion from a B-tree.\nThe algorithm below uses the former strategy.\nThere are two special cases to consider when deleting an element:\nThe procedures for these cases are in order below.\nDeletion from an internal node.\nEach element in an internal node acts as a separation value for two subtrees, therefore we need to find a replacement for separation. Note that the largest element in the left subtree is still less than the separator. Likewise, the smallest element in the right subtree is still greater than the separator. Both of those elements are in leaf nodes, and either one can be the new separator for the two subtrees. Algorithmically described below:\nRebalancing after deletion.\nRebalancing starts from a leaf and proceeds toward the root until the tree is balanced. If deleting an element from a node has brought it under the minimum size, then some elements must be redistributed to bring all nodes up to the minimum. Usually, the redistribution involves moving an element from a sibling node that has more than the minimum number of nodes. That redistribution operation is called a rotation. If no sibling can spare an element, then the deficient node must be merged with a sibling. The merge causes the parent to lose a separator element, so the parent may become deficient and need rebalancing. The merging and rebalancing may continue all the way to the root. Since the minimum element count doesn't apply to the root, making the root be the only deficient node is not a problem. The algorithm to rebalance the tree is as follows:\nSequential access.\nWhile freshly loaded databases tend to have good sequential behavior, this behavior becomes increasingly difficult to maintain as a database grows, resulting in more random I/O and performance challenges.\nInitial construction.\nA common special case is adding a large amount of \"pre-sorted\" data into an initially empty B-tree. While it is quite possible to simply perform a series of successive inserts, inserting sorted data results in a tree composed almost entirely of half-full nodes. Instead, a special \"bulk loading\" algorithm can be used to produce a more efficient tree with a higher branching factor.\nWhen the input is sorted, all insertions are at the rightmost edge of the tree, and in particular any time a node is split, we are guaranteed that no more insertions will take place in the left half. When bulk loading, we take advantage of this, and instead of splitting overfull nodes evenly, split them as \"unevenly\" as possible: leave the left node completely full and create a right node with zero keys and one child (in violation of the usual B-tree rules).\nAt the end of bulk loading, the tree is composed almost entirely of completely full nodes; only the rightmost node on each level may be less than full. Because those nodes may also be less than \"half\" full, to re-establish the normal B-tree rules, combine such nodes with their (guaranteed full) left siblings and divide the keys to produce two nodes at least half full. The only node which lacks a full left sibling is the root, which is permitted to be less than half full.\nIn filesystems.\nIn addition to its use in databases, the B-tree (or ) is also used in filesystems to allow quick random access to an arbitrary block in a particular file. The basic problem is turning the file block formula_30 address into a disk block (or perhaps to a cylinder-head-sector) address.\nSome operating systems require the user to allocate the maximum size of the file when the file is created. The file can then be allocated as contiguous disk blocks. In that case, to convert the file block address formula_30 into a disk block address, the operating system simply adds the file block address formula_30 to the address of the first disk block constituting the file. The scheme is simple, but the file cannot exceed its created size.\nOther operating systems allow a file to grow. The resulting disk blocks may not be contiguous, so mapping logical blocks to physical blocks is more involved.\nMS-DOS, for example, used a simple File Allocation Table (FAT). The FAT has an entry for each disk block, and that entry identifies whether its block is used by a file and if so, which block (if any) is the next disk block of the same file. So, the allocation of each file is represented as a linked list in the table. In order to find the disk address of file block formula_30, the operating system (or disk utility) must sequentially follow the file's linked list in the FAT. Worse, to find a free disk block, it must sequentially scan the FAT. For MS-DOS, that was not a huge penalty because the disks and files were small and the FAT had few entries and relatively short file chains. In the FAT12 filesystem (used on floppy disks and early hard disks), there were no more than 4,080 entries, and the FAT would usually be resident in memory. As disks got bigger, the FAT architecture began to confront penalties. On a large disk using FAT, it may be necessary to perform disk reads to learn the disk location of a file block to be read or written.\nTOPS-20 (and possibly TENEX) used a 0 to 2 level tree that has similarities to a B-tree. A disk block was 512 36-bit words. If the file fit in a 512 (29) word block, then the file directory would point to that physical disk block. If the file fit in 218 words, then the directory would point to an aux index; the 512 words of that index would either be NULL (the block isn't allocated) or point to the physical address of the block. If the file fit in 227 words, then the directory would point to a block holding an aux-aux index; each entry would either be NULL or point to an aux index. Consequently, the physical disk block for a 227 word file could be located in two disk reads and read on the third.\nApple's filesystem HFS+, Microsoft's NTFS, AIX (jfs2) and some Linux filesystems, such as btrfs and Ext4, use B-trees.\nB*-trees are used in the HFS and Reiser4 file systems.\nDragonFly BSD's HAMMER file system uses a modified B+-tree.\nPerformance.\nA B-tree grows slower with growing data amount, than the linearity of a linked list. Compared to a skip-list, both structures have the same performance, but the B-tree scales better for growing \"n\". A T-tree, for main memory database systems, is similar but more compact.\nVariations.\nAccess concurrency.\nLehman and Yao showed that all the read locks could be avoided (and thus concurrent access greatly improved) by linking the tree blocks at each level together with a \"next\" pointer. This results in a tree structure where both insertion and search operations descend from the root to the leaf. Write locks are only required as a tree block is modified. This maximizes access concurrency by multiple users, an important consideration for databases and/or other B-tree-based ISAM storage methods. The cost associated with this improvement is that empty pages cannot be removed from the btree during normal operations. (However, see for various strategies to implement node merging, and source code at.)\nUnited States Patent 5283894, granted in 1994, appears to show a way to use a 'Meta Access Method' to allow concurrent B+ tree access and modification without locks. The technique accesses the tree 'upwards' for both searches and updates by means of additional in-memory indexes that point at the blocks in each level in the block cache. No reorganization for deletes is needed and there are no 'next' pointers in each block as in Lehman and Yao.\nParallel algorithms.\nSince B-trees are similar in structure to red-black trees, parallel algorithms for red-black trees can be applied to B-trees as well.\nExternal links.\nBulk loading"}
{"id": "4675", "revid": "41030497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4675", "title": "British Museum", "text": "The British Museum, in the Bloomsbury area of London, England, is a public institution dedicated to human history, art and culture. Its permanent collection of some eight million works is among the largest and most comprehensive in existence, having been widely collected during the era of the British Empire. It documents the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present. It was the first public national museum in the world.\nThe British Museum was established in 1753, largely based on the collections of the Irish physician and scientist Sir Hans Sloane. It first opened to the public in 1759, in Montagu House, on the site of the current building. Its expansion over the following 250 years was largely a result of expanding British colonisation and has resulted in the creation of several branch institutions, the first being the Natural History Museum in 1881.\nIn 1973, the British Library Act 1972 detached the library department from the British Museum, but it continued to host the now separated British Library in the same Reading Room and building as the museum until 1997. The museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, and as with all national museums in the UK it charges no admission fee, except for loan exhibitions.\nIts ownership of some of its most famous objects originating in other countries is disputed and remains the subject of international controversy, most notably in the case of the Elgin Marbles of Greece and the Rosetta Stone of Egypt.\nHistory.\nSir Hans Sloane.\nAlthough today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities, the British Museum was founded as a \"universal museum\". Its foundations lie in the will of the Irish physician and naturalist Sir Hans Sloane (1660\u20131753), a London-based doctor and scientist from Ulster. During the course of his lifetime, and particularly after he married the widow of a wealthy Jamaican planter, Sloane gathered a large collection of curiosities and, not wishing to see his collection broken up after death, he bequeathed it to King George II, for the nation, for a sum of \u00a320,000.\nAt that time, Sloane's collection consisted of around 71,000 objects of all kinds including some 40,000 printed books, 7,000 manuscripts, extensive natural history specimens including 337 volumes of dried plants, prints and drawings including those by Albrecht D\u00fcrer and antiquities from Sudan, Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Ancient Near and Far East and the Americas.\nFoundation (1753).\nOn 7 June 1753, King George II gave his Royal Assent to the Act of Parliament which established the British Museum. The British Museum Act 1753 also added two other libraries to the Sloane collection, namely the Cottonian Library, assembled by Sir Robert Cotton, dating back to Elizabethan times, and the Harleian Library, the collection of the Earls of Oxford. They were joined in 1757 by the \"Old Royal Library\", now the Royal manuscripts, assembled by various British monarchs. Together these four \"foundation collections\" included many of the most treasured books now in the British Library including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the sole surviving manuscript of \"Beowulf\".\nThe British Museum was the first of a new kind of museum \u2013 national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. Sloane's collection, while including a vast miscellany of objects, tended to reflect his scientific interests. The addition of the Cotton and Harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element, and meant that the British Museum now became both National Museum and library.\nCabinet of curiosities (1753\u20131778).\nThe body of trustees decided on a converted 17th-century mansion, Montagu House, as a location for the museum, which it bought from the Montagu family for \u00a320,000. The trustees rejected Buckingham House, on the site now occupied by Buckingham Palace, on the grounds of cost and the unsuitability of its location.\nWith the acquisition of Montagu House, the first exhibition galleries and reading room for scholars opened on 15 January 1759. At this time, the largest parts of collection were the library, which took up the majority of the rooms on the ground floor of Montagu House, and the natural history objects, which took up an entire wing on the second state storey of the building. In 1763, the trustees of the British Museum, under the influence of Peter Collinson and William Watson, employed the former student of Carl Linnaeus, Daniel Solander, to reclassify the natural history collection according to the Linnaean system, thereby making the Museum a public centre of learning accessible to the full range of European natural historians. In 1823, King George IV gave the King's Library assembled by George III, and Parliament gave the right to a copy of every book published in the country, thereby ensuring that the museum's library would expand indefinitely. During the few years after its foundation the British Museum received several further gifts, including the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts and David Garrick's library of 1,000 printed plays. The predominance of natural history, books and manuscripts began to lessen when in 1772 the museum acquired for \u00a38,410 its first significant antiquities in Sir William Hamilton's \"first\" collection of Greek vases.\nIndolence and energy (1778\u20131800).\nFrom 1778, a display of objects from the South Seas brought back from the round-the-world voyages of Captain James Cook and the travels of other explorers fascinated visitors with a glimpse of previously unknown lands. The bequest of a collection of books, engraved gems, coins, prints and drawings by Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode in 1800 did much to raise the museum's reputation; but Montagu House became increasingly crowded and decrepit and it was apparent that it would be unable to cope with further expansion.\nThe museum's first notable addition towards its collection of antiquities, since its foundation, was by Sir William Hamilton (1730\u20131803), British Ambassador to Naples, who sold his collection of Greek and Roman artefacts to the museum in 1784 together with a number of other antiquities and natural history specimens. A list of donations to the museum, dated 31 January 1784, refers to the Hamilton bequest of a \"Colossal Foot of an Apollo in Marble\". It was one of two antiquities of Hamilton's collection drawn for him by Francesco Progenie, a pupil of Pietro Fabris, who also contributed a number of drawings of Mount Vesuvius sent by Hamilton to the Royal Society in London.\nGrowth and change (1800\u20131825).\nIn the early 19th century the foundations for the extensive collection of sculpture began to be laid and Greek, Roman and Egyptian artefacts dominated the antiquities displays. After the defeat of the French campaign in the Battle of the Nile, in 1801, the British Museum acquired more Egyptian sculptures and in 1802 King George III presented the Rosetta Stone \u2013 key to the deciphering of hieroglyphs. Gifts and purchases from Henry Salt, British consul general in Egypt, beginning with the Colossal bust of Ramesses II in 1818, laid the foundations of the collection of Egyptian Monumental Sculpture. Many Greek sculptures followed, notably the first purpose-built exhibition space, the Charles Towneley collection, much of it Roman sculpture, in 1805. In 1806, Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803 removed the large collection of marble sculptures from the Parthenon, on the Acropolis in Athens and transferred them to the UK. In 1816 these masterpieces of western art were acquired by The British Museum by Act of Parliament and deposited in the museum thereafter. The collections were supplemented by the Bassae frieze from Phigaleia, Greece in 1815. The Ancient Near Eastern collection also had its beginnings in 1825 with the purchase of Assyrian and Babylonian antiquities from the widow of Claudius James Rich.\nIn 1802 a buildings committee was set up to plan for expansion of the museum, and further highlighted by the donation in 1822 of the King's Library, personal library of King George III's, comprising 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, maps, charts and topographical drawings. The neoclassical architect, Sir Robert Smirke, was asked to draw up plans for an eastern extension to the museum \"...\u00a0for the reception of the Royal Library, and a Picture Gallery over it ...\" and put forward plans for today's quadrangular building, much of which can be seen today. The dilapidated Old Montagu House was demolished and work on the King's Library Gallery began in 1823. The extension, the East Wing, was completed by 1831. However, following the founding of the National Gallery, London in 1824, the proposed Picture Gallery was no longer needed, and the space on the upper floor was given over to the Natural history collections.\nThe largest building site in Europe (1825\u20131850).\nAs Sir Robert Smirke's grand neo-classical building gradually arose, the museum became a construction site. The King's Library, on the ground floor of the East Wing, was handed over in 1827, and was described as one of the finest rooms in London. Although it was not fully open to the general public until 1857, special openings were arranged during The Great Exhibition of 1851.\nIn 1840, the museum became involved in its first overseas excavations, Charles Fellows's expedition to Xanthos, in Asia Minor, whence came remains of the tombs of the rulers of ancient Lycia, among them the Nereid and Payava monuments. In 1857, Charles Newton was to discover the 4th-century BC Mausoleum of Halikarnassos, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. In the 1840s and 1850s the museum supported excavations in Assyria by A.H. Layard and others at sites such as Nimrud and Nineveh. Of particular interest to curators was the eventual discovery of Ashurbanipal's great library of cuneiform tablets, which helped to make the museum a focus for Assyrian studies.\nSir Thomas Grenville (1755\u20131846), a trustee of the British Museum from 1830, assembled a library of 20,240 volumes, which he left to the museum in his will. The books arrived in January 1847 in twenty-one horse-drawn vans. The only vacant space for this large library was a room originally intended for manuscripts, between the Front Entrance Hall and the Manuscript Saloon. The books remained here until the British Library moved to St Pancras in 1998.\nCollecting from the wider world (1850\u20131875).\nThe opening of the forecourt in 1852 marked the completion of Robert Smirke's 1823 plan, but already adjustments were having to be made to cope with the unforeseen growth of the collections. Infill galleries were constructed for Assyrian sculptures and Sydney Smirke's Round Reading Room, with space for a million books, opened in 1857. Because of continued pressure on space the decision was taken to move natural history to a new building in South Kensington, which would later become the British Museum of Natural History.\nRoughly contemporary with the construction of the new building was the career of a man sometimes called the \"second founder\" of the British Museum, the Italian librarian Anthony Panizzi. Under his supervision, the British Museum Library (now part of the British Library) quintupled in size and became a well-organised institution worthy of being called a national library, the largest library in the world after the National Library of Paris. The quadrangle at the centre of Smirke's design proved to be a waste of valuable space and was filled at Panizzi's request by a circular Reading Room of cast iron, designed by Smirke's brother, Sydney Smirke.\nUntil the mid-19th century, the museum's collections were relatively circumscribed but, in 1851, with the appointment to the staff of Augustus Wollaston Franks to curate the collections, the museum began for the first time to collect British and European medieval antiquities, prehistory, branching out into Asia and diversifying its holdings of ethnography. A real coup for the museum was the purchase in 1867, over French objections, of the Duke of Blacas's wide-ranging and valuable collection of antiquities. Overseas excavations continued and John Turtle Wood discovered the remains of the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC Temple of Artemis at Ephesos, another Wonder of the Ancient World.\nScholarship and legacies (1875\u20131900).\nThe natural history collections were an integral part of the British Museum until their removal to the new British Museum of Natural History in 1887, nowadays the Natural History Museum. With the departure and the completion of the new White Wing (fronting Montague Street) in 1884, more space was available for antiquities and ethnography and the library could further expand. This was a time of innovation as electric lighting was introduced in the Reading Room and exhibition galleries.\nThe William Burges collection of armoury was bequeathed to the museum in 1881. In 1882, the museum was involved in the establishment of the independent Egypt Exploration Fund (now Society) the first British body to carry out research in Egypt. A bequest from Miss Emma Turner in 1892 financed excavations in Cyprus. In 1897 the death of the great collector and curator, A. W. Franks, was followed by an immense bequest of 3,300 finger rings, 153 drinking vessels, 512 pieces of continental porcelain, 1,500 netsuke, 850 inro, over 30,000 bookplates and miscellaneous items of jewellery and plate, among them the Oxus Treasure.\nIn 1898 Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild bequeathed the Waddesdon Bequest, the glittering contents from his New Smoking Room at Waddesdon Manor. This consisted of almost 300 pieces of \"objets d'art et de vertu\" which included exquisite examples of jewellery, plate, enamel, carvings, glass and maiolica, among them the Holy Thorn Reliquary, probably created in the 1390s in Paris for John, Duke of Berry. The collection was in the tradition of a \"Schatzkammer\" such as those formed by the Renaissance princes of Europe. Baron Ferdinand's will was most specific, and failure to observe the terms would make it void, the collection should be\n These terms are still observed, and the collection occupies room 2a.\nNew century, new building (1900\u20131925).\nBy the last years of the 19th century, The British Museum's collections had increased to the extent that its building was no longer large enough. In 1895 the trustees purchased the 69 houses surrounding the museum with the intention of demolishing them and building around the west, north and east sides of the museum. The first stage was the construction of the northern wing beginning 1906.\nAll the while, the collections kept growing. Emil Torday collected in Central Africa, Aurel Stein in Central Asia, D.G. Hogarth, Leonard Woolley and T. E. Lawrence excavated at Carchemish. Around this time, the American collector and philanthropist J Pierpont Morgan donated a substantial number of objects to the museum, including William Greenwell's collection of prehistoric artefacts from across Europe which he had purchased for \u00a310,000 in 1908. Morgan had also acquired a major part of Sir John Evans's coin collection, which was later sold to the museum by his son John Pierpont Morgan Junior in 1915. In 1918, because of the threat of wartime bombing, some objects were evacuated via the London Post Office Railway to Holborn, the National Library of Wales (Aberystwyth) and a country house near Malvern. On the return of antiquities from wartime storage in 1919 some objects were found to have deteriorated. A conservation laboratory was set up in May 1920 and became a permanent department in 1931. It is today the oldest in continuous existence. In 1923, the British Museum welcomed over one million visitors.\nDisruption and reconstruction (1925\u20131950).\nNew mezzanine floors were constructed and book stacks rebuilt in an attempt to cope with the flood of books. In 1931, the art dealer Sir Joseph Duveen offered funds to build a gallery for the Parthenon sculptures. Designed by the American architect John Russell Pope, it was completed in 1938. The appearance of the exhibition galleries began to change as dark Victorian reds gave way to modern pastel shades. However, in August 1939, due to the imminence of war and the likelihood of air-raids, the Parthenon Sculptures, along with the museum's most valued collections, were dispersed to secure basements, country houses, Aldwych Underground station, the National Library of Wales and a quarry. The evacuation was timely, for in 1940 the Duveen Gallery was severely damaged by bombing. Meanwhile, prior to the war, the Nazis had sent a researcher to the British Museum for several years with the aim of \"compiling an anti-Semitic history of Anglo-Jewry\". After the war, the museum continued to collect from all countries and all centuries: among the most spectacular additions were the 2600 BC Mesopotamian treasure from Ur, discovered during Leonard Woolley's 1922\u201334 excavations. Gold, silver and garnet grave goods from the Anglo-Saxon ship burial at Sutton Hoo (1939) and late Roman silver tableware from Mildenhall, Suffolk (1946). The immediate post-war years were taken up with the return of the collections from protection and the restoration of the museum after the Blitz. Work also began on restoring the damaged Duveen Gallery.\nA new public face (1950\u20131975).\nIn 1953, the museum celebrated its bicentenary. Many changes followed: the first full-time in-house designer and publications officer were appointed in 1964, the Friends organisation was set up in 1968, an Education Service established in 1970 and publishing house in 1973. In 1963, a new Act of Parliament introduced administrative reforms. It became easier to lend objects, the constitution of the board of trustees changed and the Natural History Museum became fully independent. By 1959 the Coins and Medals office suite, completely destroyed during the war, was rebuilt and re-opened, attention turned towards the gallery work with new tastes in design leading to the remodelling of Robert Smirke's Classical and Near Eastern galleries. In 1962 the Duveen Gallery was finally restored and the Parthenon Sculptures were moved back into it, once again at the heart of the museum.\nBy the 1970s the museum was again expanding. More services for the public were introduced; visitor numbers soared, with the temporary exhibition \"Treasures of Tutankhamun\" in 1972, attracting 1,694,117 visitors, the most successful in British history. In the same year the Act of Parliament establishing the British Library was passed, separating the collection of manuscripts and printed books from the British Museum. This left the museum with antiquities; coins, medals and paper money; prints &amp; drawings; and ethnography. A pressing problem was finding space for additions to the library which now required an extra of shelving each year. The Government suggested a site at St Pancras for the new British Library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997.\nThe Great Court emerges (1975\u20132000).\nThe departure of the British Library to a new site at St Pancras, finally achieved in 1998, provided the space needed for the books. It also created the opportunity to redevelop the vacant space in Robert Smirke's 19th-century central quadrangle into the Queen Elizabeth II Great Court \u2013 the largest covered square in Europe \u2013 which opened in 2000. The ethnography collections, which had been housed in the short-lived Museum of Mankind at 6 Burlington Gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries in the museum in 2000.\nThe museum again readjusted its collecting policies as interest in \"modern\" objects: prints, drawings, medals and the decorative arts reawakened. Ethnographical fieldwork was carried out in places as diverse as New Guinea, Madagascar, Romania, Guatemala and Indonesia and there were excavations in the Near East, Egypt, Sudan and the UK. The Weston Gallery of Roman Britain, opened in 1997, displayed a number of recently discovered hoards which demonstrated the richness of what had been considered an unimportant part of the Roman Empire. The museum turned increasingly towards private funds for buildings, acquisitions and other purposes.\nThe British Museum today.\nToday the museum no longer houses collections of natural history, and the books and manuscripts it once held now form part of the independent British Library. The museum nevertheless preserves its universality in its collections of artefacts representing the cultures of the world, ancient and modern. The original 1753 collection has grown to over 13\u00a0million objects at the British Museum, 70\u00a0million at the Natural History Museum and 150\u00a0million at the British Library.\nThe Round Reading Room, which was designed by the architect Sydney Smirke, opened in 1857. For almost 150 years researchers came here to consult the museum's vast library. The Reading Room closed in 1997 when the national library (the British Library) moved to a new building at St Pancras. Today it has been transformed into the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Centre.\nWith the bookstacks in the central courtyard of the museum empty, the demolition for Lord Foster's glass-roofed Great Court could begin. The Great Court, opened in 2000, while undoubtedly improving circulation around the museum, was criticised for having a lack of exhibition space at a time when the museum was in serious financial difficulties and many galleries were closed to the public. At the same time the African collections that had been temporarily housed in 6 Burlington Gardens were given a new gallery in the North Wing funded by the Sainsbury family \u2013 with the donation valued at \u00a325\u00a0million.\nAs part of its very large website, the museum has the largest online database of objects in the collection of any museum in the world, with 2,000,000 individual object entries, 650,000 of them illustrated, online at the start of 2012. There is also a \"Highlights\" database with longer entries on over 4,000 objects, and several specialised online research catalogues and online journals (all free to access). In 2013 the museum's website received 19.5\u00a0millions visits, an increase of 47% from the previous year.\nIn 2013 the museum received a record 6.7\u00a0million visitors, an increase of 20% from the previous year. Popular exhibitions including \"Life and Death in Pompeii and Herculaneum\" and \"Ice Age Art\" are credited with helping fuel the increase in visitors. Plans were announced in September 2014 to recreate the entire building along with all exhibits in the video game \"Minecraft\" in conjunction with members of the public.\nGovernance.\nThe British Museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport through a three-year funding agreement. Its head is the Director of the British Museum. The British Museum was run from its inception by a 'principal librarian' (when the book collections were still part of the museum), a role that was renamed 'director and principal librarian' in 1898, and 'director' in 1973 (on the separation of the British Library).\nA board of 25 trustees (with the director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to Government) is responsible for the general management and control of the museum, in accordance with the British Museum Act 1963 and the Museums and Galleries Act 1992. Prior to the 1963 Act, it was chaired by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor and the Speaker of the House of Commons. The board was formed on the museum's inception to hold its collections in trust for the nation without actually owning them themselves, and now fulfil a mainly advisory role. Trustee appointments are governed by the regulatory framework set out in the code of practice on public appointments issued by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments.\nBuilding.\nThe Greek Revival fa\u00e7ade facing Great Russell Street is a characteristic building of Sir Robert Smirke, with 44 columns in the Ionic order high, closely based on those of the temple of Athena Polias at Priene in Asia Minor. The pediment over the main entrance is decorated by sculptures by Sir Richard Westmacott depicting \"The Progress of Civilisation\", consisting of fifteen allegorical figures, installed in 1852.\nThe construction commenced around the courtyard with the East Wing (The King's Library) in 1823\u20131828, followed by the North Wing in 1833\u20131838, which originally housed among other galleries a reading room, now the Wellcome Gallery. Work was also progressing on the northern half of the West Wing (The Egyptian Sculpture Gallery) 1826\u20131831, with Montagu House demolished in 1842 to make room for the final part of the West Wing, completed in 1846, and the South Wing with its great colonnade, initiated in 1843 and completed in 1847, when the Front Hall and Great Staircase were opened to the public. The museum is faced with Portland stone, but the perimeter walls and other parts of the building were built using Haytor granite from Dartmoor in South Devon, transported via the unique Haytor Granite Tramway.\nIn 1846 Robert Smirke was replaced as the museum's architect by his brother Sydney Smirke, whose major addition was the Round Reading Room 1854\u20131857; at in diameter it was then the second widest dome in the world, the Pantheon in Rome being slightly wider.\nThe next major addition was the White Wing 1882\u20131884 added behind the eastern end of the South Front, the architect being Sir John Taylor.\nIn 1895, Parliament gave the museum trustees a loan of \u00a3200,000 to purchase from the Duke of Bedford all 69 houses which backed onto the museum building in the five surrounding streets \u2013 Great Russell Street, Montague Street, Montague Place, Bedford Square and Bloomsbury Street. The trustees planned to demolish these houses and to build around the west, north and east sides of the museum new galleries that would completely fill the block on which the museum stands. The architect Sir John James Burnet was petitioned to put forward ambitious long-term plans to extend the building on all three sides. Most of the houses in Montague Place were knocked down a few years after the sale. Of this grand plan only the Edward VII galleries in the centre of the North Front were ever constructed, these were built 1906\u201314 to the design by J.J. Burnet, and opened by King George V and Queen Mary in 1914. They now house the museum's collections of Prints and Drawings and Oriental Antiquities. There was not enough money to put up more new buildings, and so the houses in the other streets are nearly all still standing.\nThe Duveen Gallery, sited to the west of the Egyptian, Greek &amp; Assyrian sculpture galleries, was designed to house the Elgin Marbles by the American Beaux-Arts architect John Russell Pope. Although completed in 1938, it was hit by a bomb in 1940 and remained semi-derelict for 22 years, before reopening in 1962. Other areas damaged during World War II bombing included: in September 1940 two unexploded bombs hit the Edward VII galleries, the King's Library received a direct hit from a high explosive bomb, incendiaries fell on the dome of the Round Reading Room but did little damage; on the night of 10 to 11 May 1941 several incendiaries fell on the south-west corner of the museum, destroying the book stack and 150,000 books in the courtyard and the galleries around the top of the Great Staircase \u2013 this damage was not fully repaired until the early 1960s.\nThe Queen Elizabeth II Great Court is a covered square at the centre of the British Museum designed by the engineers Buro Happold and the architects Foster and Partners. The Great Court opened in December 2000 and is the largest covered square in Europe. The roof is a glass and steel construction, built by an Austrian steelwork company, with 1,656 uniquely shaped panes of glass. At the centre of the Great Court is the Reading Room vacated by the British Library, its functions now moved to St Pancras. The Reading Room is open to any member of the public who wishes to read there.\nToday, the British Museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world, covering an area of over 92,000\u00a0m2 (990,000 sq. ft). In addition to 21,600\u00a0m2 (232,000 sq. ft) of on-site storage space, and 9,400\u00a0m2 (101,000 sq. ft) of external storage space. Altogether the British Museum showcases on public display less than 1% of its entire collection, approximately 50,000 items. There are nearly one hundred galleries open to the public, representing of exhibition space, although the less popular ones have restricted opening times. However, the lack of a large temporary exhibition space has led to the \u00a3135\u00a0million World Conservation and Exhibition Centre to provide one and to concentrate all the museum's conservation facilities into one Conservation Centre. This project was announced in July 2007, with the architects Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners. It was granted planning permission in December 2009 and was completed in time for the Viking exhibition in March 2014.\nBlythe House in West Kensington is used by the museum for off-site storage of small and medium-sized artefacts, and Franks House in East London is used for storage and work on the \"Early Prehistory\" \u2013 Palaeolithic and Mesolithic \u2013 and some other collections.\nDepartments.\nDepartment of Egypt and Sudan.\nThe British Museum houses the world's largest and most comprehensive collection of Egyptian antiquities (with over 100,000 pieces) outside the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. A collection of immense importance for its range and quality, it includes objects of all periods from virtually every site of importance in Egypt and the Sudan. Together, they illustrate every aspect of the cultures of the Nile Valley (including Nubia), from the Predynastic Neolithic period (c. 10,000 BC) through Coptic (Christian) times (12th century AD), and up to the present day, a time-span over 11,000 years.\nEgyptian antiquities have formed part of the British Museum collection ever since its foundation in 1753 after receiving 160 Egyptian objects from Sir Hans Sloane. After the defeat of the French forces under Napoleon at the Battle of the Nile in 1801, the Egyptian antiquities collected were confiscated by the British army and presented to the British Museum in 1803. These works, which included the famed Rosetta Stone, were the first important group of large sculptures to be acquired by the museum. Thereafter, the UK appointed Henry Salt as consul in Egypt who amassed a huge collection of antiquities, some of which were assembled and transported with great ingenuity by the famous Italian explorer Giovanni Belzoni. Most of the antiquities Salt collected were purchased by the British Museum and the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre.\nBy 1866 the collection consisted of some 10,000 objects. Antiquities from excavations started to come to the museum in the latter part of the 19th century as a result of the work of the Egypt Exploration Fund under the efforts of E.A. Wallis Budge. Over the years more than 11,000 objects came from this source, including pieces from Amarna, Bubastis and Deir el-Bahari. Other organisations and individuals also excavated and donated objects to the British Museum, including Flinders Petrie's Egypt Research Account and the British School of Archaeology in Egypt, as well as the University of Oxford Expedition to Kawa and Faras in Sudan.\nActive support by the museum for excavations in Egypt continued to result in important acquisitions throughout the 20th century until changes in antiquities laws in Egypt led to the suspension of policies allowing finds to be exported, although divisions still continue in Sudan. The British Museum conducted its own excavations in Egypt where it received divisions of finds, including Asyut (1907), Mostagedda and Matmar (1920s), Ashmunein (1980s) and sites in Sudan such as Soba, Kawa and the Northern Dongola Reach (1990s). The size of the Egyptian collections now stand at over 110,000 objects.\nIn autumn 2001 the eight million objects forming the museum's permanent collection were further expanded by the addition of six million objects from the Wendorf Collection of Egyptian and Sudanese Prehistory. These were donated by Professor Fred Wendorf of Southern Methodist University in Texas, and comprise the entire collection of artefacts and environmental remains from his excavations at Prehistoric sites in the Sahara Desert between 1963 and 1997. Other fieldwork collections have recently come from Dietrich and Rosemarie Klemm (University of Munich) and William Adams (University of Kentucky).\nThe seven permanent Egyptian galleries at the British Museum, which include its largest exhibition space (Room 4, for monumental sculpture), can display only 4% of its Egyptian holdings. The second-floor galleries have a selection of the museum's collection of 140 mummies and coffins, the largest outside Cairo. A high proportion of the collection comes from tombs or contexts associated with the cult of the dead, and it is these pieces, in particular the mummies, that remain among the most eagerly sought-after exhibits by visitors to the museum.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nPredynastic and Early Dynastic period (c. 6000 BC \u2013 c.2690 BC)\nOld Kingdom (2690\u20132181 BC)\nMiddle Kingdom (2134\u20131690 BC)\nSecond Itermediate Period (1650\u20131550 BC)\nNew Kingdom (1549\u20131069 BC)\nThird Intermediate Period (1069\u2013664 BC)\nLate Period (664\u2013332 BC)\nPtolemaic dynasty (305\u201330 BC)\nRoman Period (30 BC-641 AD)\nDepartment of Greece and Rome.\nThe British Museum has one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of antiquities from the Classical world, with over 100,000 objects. These mostly range in date from the beginning of the Greek Bronze Age (about 3200 BC) to the establishment of Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, with the Edict of Milan under the reign of the Roman Emperor Constantine I in 313 AD. Archaeology was in its infancy during the nineteenth century and many pioneering individuals began excavating sites across the Classical world, chief among them for the museum were Charles Newton, John Turtle Wood, Robert Murdoch Smith and Charles Fellows.\nThe Greek objects originate from across the Ancient Greek world, from the mainland of Greece and the Aegean Islands, to neighbouring lands in Asia Minor and Egypt in the eastern Mediterranean and as far as the western lands of Magna Graecia that include Sicily and southern Italy. The Cycladic, Minoan and Mycenaean cultures are represented, and the Greek collection includes important sculpture from the Parthenon in Athens, as well as elements of two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesos.\nBeginning from the early Bronze Age, the department also houses one of the widest-ranging collections of Italic and Etruscan antiquities outside Italy, as well as extensive groups of material from Cyprus and non-Greek colonies in Lycia and Caria on Asia Minor. There is some material from the Roman Republic, but the collection's strength is in its comprehensive array of objects from across the Roman Empire, with the exception of Britain (which is the mainstay of the Department of Prehistory and Europe).\nThe collections of ancient jewellery and bronzes, Greek vases (many from graves in southern Italy that were once part of Sir William Hamilton's and Chevalier Durand's collections), Roman glass including the famous Cameo glass Portland Vase, Roman gold glass (the second largest collection after the Vatican Museums), Roman mosaics from Carthage and Utica in North Africa that were excavated by Nathan Davis, and silver hoards from Roman Gaul (some of which were bequeathed by the philanthropist and museum trustee Richard Payne Knight), are particularly important. Cypriot antiquities are strong too and have benefited from the purchase of Sir Robert Hamilton Lang's collection as well as the bequest of Emma Turner in 1892, which funded many excavations on the island. Roman sculptures (many of which are copies of Greek originals) are particularly well represented by the Townley collection as well as residual sculptures from the famous Farnese collection.\nObjects from the Department of Greece and Rome are located throughout the museum, although many of the architectural monuments are to be found on the ground floor, with connecting galleries from Gallery 5 to Gallery 23. On the upper floor, there are galleries devoted to smaller material from ancient Italy, Greece, Cyprus and the Roman Empire.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nTemple of Hephaestus\nParthenon\nPropylaea\nErechtheion\nTemple of Athena Nike\nSanctuary of Apollo at Daphni\nChoragic Monument of Thrasyllos\nTower of the Winds\nTemple of Bassae\nMausoleum at Halicarnassus\nTemple of Artemis in Ephesus\nKnidos in Asia Minor\nXanthos in Asia Minor\nWider collection\nPrehistoric Greece and Italy (3300 BC \u2013 8th century BC)\nEtruscan (8th century BC \u2013 1st century BC)\nAncient Greece (8th century BC \u2013 4th century AD)\nAncient Rome (1st century BC \u2013 4th century AD)\nThe collection encompasses architectural, sculptural and epigraphic items from many other sites across the classical world including Amathus, Atripalda, Aphrodisias, Delos, Iasos, Idalion, Lindus, Kalymnos, Kerch, Rhamnous, Salamis, Sestos, Sounion, Tomis and Thessanoloki.\nDepartment of the Middle East.\nWith a collection numbering some 330,000 works, the British Museum possesses the world's largest and most important collection of Mesopotamian antiquities outside Iraq. A collection of immense importance, the holdings of Assyrian sculpture, Babylonian and Sumerian antiquities are among the most comprehensive in the world with entire suites of rooms panelled in alabaster Assyrian palace reliefs from Nimrud, Nineveh and Khorsabad.\nThe collections represent the civilisations of the ancient Near East and its adjacent areas. These cover Mesopotamia, Persia, the Arabian Peninsula, Anatolia, the Caucasus, parts of Central Asia, Syria, the Holy Land and Phoenician settlements in the western Mediterranean from the prehistoric period and include objects from the beginning of Islam in the 7th century.\nThe first significant addition of Mesopotamian objects was from the collection of Claudius James Rich in 1825. The collection was later dramatically enlarged by the excavations of A. H. Layard at the Assyrian sites of Nimrud and Nineveh between 1845 and 1851. At Nimrud, Layard discovered the North-West Palace of Ashurnasirpal II, as well as three other palaces and various temples. He later uncovered the Palace of Sennacherib at Nineveh with 'no less than seventy-one halls'. As a result, a large numbers of Lamassu's, palace reliefs, stelae, including the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, were brought to the British Museum.\nLayard's work was continued by his assistant, Hormuzd Rassam and in 1852\u20131854 he went on to discover the North Palace of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh with many magnificent reliefs, including the famous Lion Hunt of Ashurbanipal and Lachish reliefs. He also discovered the Royal Library of Ashurbanipal, a large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance that today number around 130,000 pieces. W. K. Loftus excavated in Nimrud between 1850 and 1855 and found a remarkable hoard of ivories in the Burnt Palace. Between 1878 and 1882 Rassam greatly improved the museum's holdings with exquisite objects including the Cyrus Cylinder from Babylon, the bronze gates from Balawat, important objects from Sippar, and a fine collection of Urartian bronzes from Toprakkale including a copper figurine of a winged, human-headed bull.\nIn the early 20th century excavations were carried out at Carchemish, Turkey by D. G. Hogarth and Leonard Woolley, the latter assisted by T. E. Lawrence. The Mesopotamian collections were greatly augmented by excavations in southern Iraq after the First World War. From Tell al-Ubaid came the bronze furnishings of a Sumerian temple, including life-sized lions and a panel featuring the lion-headed eagle Indugud found by H. R. Hall in 1919\u201324. Woolley went on to excavate Ur between 1922 and 1934, discovering the 'Royal Cemeteries' of the 3rd millennium BC. Some of the masterpieces include the 'Standard of Ur', the 'Ram in a Thicket', the 'Royal Game of Ur', and two bull-headed lyres. The department also has three diorite statues of the ruler Gudea from the ancient state of Lagash and a series of limestone kudurru or boundary stones from different locations across ancient Mesopotamia.\nAlthough the collections centre on Mesopotamia, most of the surrounding areas are well represented. The Achaemenid collection was enhanced with the addition of the Oxus Treasure in 1897 and objects excavated by the German scholar Ernst Herzfeld and the Hungarian-British explorer Sir Aurel Stein. Reliefs and sculptures from the site of Persepolis were donated by Sir Gore Ouseley in 1825 and the 5th Earl of Aberdeen in 1861 and the museum received part of a pot-hoard of jewellery from Pasargadae as the division of finds in 1963 and part of the Ziwiye hoard in 1971. A large column base from the One Hundred Column Hall at Persepolis was acquired in exchange from the Oriental Institute, Chicago. Moreover, the museum has been able to acquire one of the greatest assemblages of Achaemenid silverware in the world. The later Sasanian Empire is also well represented by ornate silver plates and cups, many representing ruling monarchs hunting lions and deer. Phoenician antiquities come from across the region, but the Tharros collection from Sardinia and the large number of Phoenician stelae from Carthage and Maghrawa are outstanding. The number of Phoenician inscriptions from sites across Cyprus is also considerable, and include artefacts found at the Kition necropolis (with the two Kition Tariffs having the longest Phoenician inscription discovered on the island), the Idalion temple site and two bilingual pedestals found at Tamassos. Another often overlooked highlight is Yemeni antiquities, the finest collection outside that country. Furthermore, the museum has a representative collection of Dilmun and Parthian material excavated from various burial mounds at the ancient sites of A'ali and Shakhura (that included a Roman ribbed glass bowl) in Bahrain.\nFrom the modern state of Syria come almost forty funerary busts from Palmyra and a group of stone reliefs from the excavations of Max von Oppenheim at Tell Halaf that was purchased in 1920. More material followed from the excavations of Max Mallowan at Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak in 1935\u20131938 and from Woolley at Alalakh in the years just before and after the Second World War. Mallowan returned with his wife Agatha Christie to carry out further digs at Nimrud in the postwar period which secured many important artefacts for the museum. The collection of Palestinian material was strengthened by the work of Kathleen Kenyon at Tell es-Sultan (Jericho) in the 1950s and the acquisition in 1980 of around 17,000 objects found at Lachish by the Wellcome-Marston expedition of 1932\u20131938. Archaeological digs are still taking place where permitted in the Middle East, and, depending on the country, the museum continues to receive a share of the finds from sites such as in Jordan.\nThe museum's collection of Islamic art, including archaeological material, numbers about 40,000 objects, one of the largest of its kind in the world. As such, it contains a broad range of pottery, paintings, tiles, metalwork, glass, seals, and inscriptions from across the Islamic world, from Spain in the west to India in the east. It is particularly famous for its collection of Iznik ceramics (the largest in the world), its large number of mosque lamps including one from the Dome of the Rock, mediaeval metalwork such as the Vaso Vescovali with its depictions of the Zodiac, a fine selection of astrolabes, and Mughal paintings and precious artwork including a large jade terrapin made for the Emperor Jahangir. Thousands of objects were excavated after the war by professional archaeologists at Iranian sites such as Siraf by David Whitehouse and Alamut Castle by Peter Willey. The collection was augmented in 1983 by the Godman bequest of Iznik, Hispano-Moresque and early Iranian pottery. Artefacts from the Islamic world are on display in Gallery 34 of the museum.\nA representative selection from the Department of Middle East, including the most important pieces, are on display in 13 galleries throughout the museum and total some 4,500 objects. A whole suite of rooms on the ground floor display the sculptured reliefs from the Assyrian palaces at Nineveh, Nimrud and Khorsabad, while 8 galleries on the upper floor hold smaller material from ancient sites across the Middle East. The remainder form the study collection which ranges in size from beads to large sculptures. They include approximately 130,000 cuneiform tablets from Mesopotamia.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nNimrud:\nAssyrian palace reliefs from:\nSculptures and inscriptions:\nAssyrian palace reliefs and sculptures from:\nRoyal Library of Ashurbanipal:\nKhorsabad and Balawat:\nDepartment of Prints and Drawings.\nThe Department of Prints and Drawings holds the national collection of Western prints and drawings. It ranks as one of the largest and best print room collections in existence alongside the Albertina in Vienna, the Paris collections and the Hermitage. The holdings are easily accessible to the general public in the Study Room, unlike many such collections. The department also has its own exhibition gallery in Room 90, where the displays and exhibitions change several times a year.\nSince its foundation in 1808, the prints and drawings collection has grown to international renown as one of the richest and most representative collections in the world. There are approximately 50,000 drawings and over two million prints. The collection of drawings covers the period from the 14th century to the present, and includes many works of the highest quality by the leading artists of the European schools. The collection of prints covers the tradition of fine printmaking from its beginnings in the 15th century up to the present, with near complete holdings of most of the great names before the 19th century. Key benefactors to the department have been Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode, Richard Payne Knight, John Malcolm, Campbell Dodgson, C\u00e9sar Mange de Hauke and Tom\u00e1s Harris.\nThere are groups of drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, (including his only surviving full-scale cartoon), D\u00fcrer (a collection of 138 drawings is one of the finest in existence), Peter Paul Rubens, Rembrandt, Claude and Watteau, and largely complete collections of the works of all the great printmakers including D\u00fcrer (99 engravings, 6 etchings and most of his 346 woodcuts), Rembrandt and Goya. More than 30,000 British drawings and watercolours include important examples of work by Hogarth, Sandby, Turner, Girtin, Constable, Cotman, Cox, Gillray, Rowlandson, Towne and Cruikshank, as well as all the great Victorians. The collection contains the unique set of watercolours by the pioneering colonist John White, the first British artist in America and first European to paint Native Americans. There are about a million British prints including more than 20,000 satires and outstanding collections of works by William Blake and Thomas Bewick.. The great eleven volume Catalogue of Political and Personal Satires Preserved in the Department of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum compiled between 1870 and 1954 is the definitive reference work for the study of British Satirical prints. Over 500,000 objects from the department are now on the online collection database, many with high-quality images. A 2011 donation of \u00a31\u00a0million enabled the museum to acquire a complete set of Pablo Picasso's \"Vollard Suite\".\nDepartment of Britain, Europe and Prehistory.\nThe Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory is responsible for collections that cover a vast expanse of time and geography. It includes some of the earliest objects made by humans in east Africa over 2\u00a0million years ago, as well as Prehistoric and neolithic objects from other parts of the world; and the art and archaeology of Europe from the earliest times to the present day. Archeological excavation of prehistoric material took off and expanded considerably in the twentieth century and the department now has literally millions of objects from the Paleolithic and Mesolithic periods throughout the world, as well as from the Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron Age in Europe. Stone Age material from Africa has been donated by famous archaeologists such as Louis and Mary Leakey, and Gertrude Caton\u2013Thompson. Paleolithic objects from the Sturge, Christy and Lartet collections include some of the earliest works of art from Europe. Many Bronze Age objects from across Europe were added during the nineteenth century, often from large collections built up by excavators and scholars such as Greenwell in Britain, Tobin and Cooke in Ireland, Lukis and de la Granci\u00e8re in Brittany, Worsaae in Denmark, Siret at El Argar in Spain, and Klemm and Edelmann in Germany. A representative selection of Iron Age artefacts from Hallstatt were acquired as a result of the Evans/Lubbock excavations and from Giubiasco in Ticino through the Swiss National Museum.\nIn addition, the British Museum's collections covering the period AD 300 to 1100 are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world, extending from Spain to the Black Sea and from North Africa to Scandinavia; a representative selection of these has recently been redisplayed in a newly refurbished gallery. Important collections include Latvian, Norwegian, Gotlandic and Merovingian material from Johann Karl B\u00e4hr, Alfred Heneage Cocks, Sir James Curle and Philippe Delamain respectively. However, the undoubted highlight from the early mediaeval period is the magnificent items from the Sutton Hoo royal grave, generously donated to the nation by the landowner Edith Pretty. The late mediaeval collection includes a large number of seal-dies from across Europe, the most famous of which include those from the Town of Boppard in Germany, Isabella of Hainault from her tomb in Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris, Inchaffray Abbey in Scotland and Robert Fitzwalter, one of the Barons who led the revolt against King John in England. There is also a large collection of medieval signet rings, prominent among them is the gold signet ring belonging to Jean III de Grailly who fought in the Hundred Years' War, as well as those of Mary, Queen of Scots and Richard I of England. Other groups of artifacts represented in the department include the national collection of (c.100) icon paintings, most of which originate from the Byzantine Empire and Russia, and over 40 mediaeval astrolabes from across Europe and the Middle East. The department also includes the national collection of horology with one of the most wide-ranging assemblage of clocks, watches and other timepieces in Europe, with masterpieces from every period in the development of time-keeping. Choice horological pieces came from the Morgan and Ilbert collections. The department is also responsible for the curation of Romano-British objects \u2013 the museum has by far the most extensive such collection in Britain and one of the most representative regional collections in Europe outside Italy. It is particularly famous for the large number of late Roman silver treasures, many of which were found in East Anglia, the most important of which is the Mildenhall Treasure. The museum purchased many Roman-British objects from the antiquarian Charles Roach Smith in 1856. These quickly formed the nucleus of the collection. The department also includes ethnographic material from across Europe including a collection of Bulgarian costumes and shadow puppets from Greece and Turkey. A particular highlight are the three S\u00e1mi drums from northern Sweden of which only about 70 are extant.\nObjects from the Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory are mostly found on the upper floor of the museum, with a suite of galleries numbered from 38 to 51. Most of the collection is stored in its archive facilities, where it is available for research and study.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nStone Age (c. 3.4\u00a0million years BC \u2013 c. 2000 BC)\nBronze Age (c. 3300 BC \u2013 c. 600 BC)\nIron Age (c. 600 BC \u2013 c. 1st century AD)\nRomano-British (43 AD \u2013 410 AD)\nEarly Mediaeval (c. 4th century AD \u2013 c. 1000 AD)\nMediaeval (c. 1000 AD \u2013 c. 1500 AD)\nRenaissance to Modern (c. 1500 AD \u2013 present)\nThe many hoards of treasure include those of Esquiline, Carthage, First Cyprus, Hockwold, Hoxne, Lampsacus, Mildenhall, Vale of York and Water Newton, (4th\u201310th centuries AD)\nDepartment of Asia.\nThe scope of the Department of Asia is extremely broad; its collections of over 75,000 objects cover the material culture of the whole Asian continent (from East, South, Central and South-East Asia) and from the Neolithic up to the present day. Until recently, this department concentrated on collecting Oriental antiquities from urban or semi-urban societies across the Asian continent. Many of those objects were collected by colonial officers and explorers in former parts of the British Empire, especially the Indian subcontinent. Examples include the collections made by individuals such as James Wilkinson Breeks, Sir Alexander Cunningham, Sir Harold Deane, Sir Walter Elliot, James Prinsep, Charles Masson, Sir John Marshall and Charles Stuart. A large number of Chinese antiquities were purchased from the Anglo-Greek banker George Eumorfopoulos in the 1930s. The large collection of some 1800 Japanese prints and paintings owned by Arthur Morrison was acquired in the early twentieth century. In the second half of the twentieth century, the museum greatly benefited from the bequest of the philanthropist PT Brooke Sewell, which allowed the department to purchase many objects and fill in gaps in the collection.\nIn 2004, the ethnographic collections from Asia were transferred to the department. These reflect the diverse environment of the largest continent in the world and range from India to China, the Middle East to Japan. Much of the ethnographic material comes from objects originally owned by tribal cultures and hunter-gatherers, many of whose way of life has disappeared in the last century. Particularly valuable collections are from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (much assembled by the British naval officer Maurice Portman), Sri Lanka (especially through the colonial administrator Hugh Nevill), Northern Thailand, south-west China, the Ainu of Hokaidu in Japan (chief among them the collection of the Scottish zoologist John Anderson), Siberia (with artefacts collected by the explorer Kate Marsden and Bassett Digby and is notable for its Sakha pieces, especially the ivory model of a summer festival at Yakutsk) and the islands of South-East Asia, especially Borneo. The latter benefited from the purchase in 1905 of the Sarawak collection put together by Dr Charles Hose, as well as from other colonial officers such as Edward A Jeffreys. In addition, a unique and valuable group of objects from Java, including shadow puppets and a gamelan musical set, was assembled by Sir Stamford Raffles.\nThe principal gallery devoted to Asian art in the museum is Gallery 33 with its comprehensive display of Chinese, Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asian objects. An adjacent gallery showcases the Amaravati sculptures and monuments. Other galleries on the upper floors are devoted to its Japanese, Korean, painting and calligraphy, and Chinese ceramics collections.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nEast Asia\nSouth Asia\nSouth-east Asia\nDepartment of Africa, Oceania and the Americas.\nThe British Museum houses one of the world's most comprehensive collections of Ethnographic material from Africa, Oceania and the Americas, representing the cultures of indigenous peoples throughout the world. Over 350,000 objects spanning thousands of years tells the history of mankind from three major continents and many rich and diverse cultures; the collecting of modern artefacts is ongoing. Many individuals have added to the department's collection over the years but those assembled by Henry Christy, Harry Beasley and William Oldman are outstanding. Objects from this department are mostly on display in several galleries on the ground and lower floors. Gallery 24 displays ethnographic from every continent while adjacent galleries focus on North America and Mexico. A long suite of rooms (Gallery 25) on the lower floor display African art. There are plans in place to develop permanent galleries for showcasing art from Oceania and South America.\nAfrica\nThe Sainsbury African Galleries display 600 objects from the greatest permanent collection of African arts and culture in the world. The three permanent galleries provide a substantial exhibition space for the museum's African collection comprising over 200,000 objects. A curatorial scope that encompasses both archaeological and contemporary material, including both unique masterpieces of artistry and objects of everyday life. A great addition was material amassed by Sir Henry Wellcome, which was donated by the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum in 1954. Highlights of the African collection include objects found at megalithic circles in The Gambia, a dozen exquisite Afro-Portuguese ivories, a series of soapstone figures from the Kissi people in Sierra Leone and Liberia, hoard of bronze Kru currency rings from the Sinoe River in Liberia, Asante goldwork and regalia from Ghana including the Bowdich collection, the rare Akan Drum from the same region in west Africa, pair of door panels and lintel from the palace at Ikere-Ekiti in Yorubaland, the Benin and Igbo-Ukwu bronze sculptures, the beautiful Bronze Head of Queen Idia, a magnificent brass head of a Yoruba ruler and quartz throne from Ife, a similar terracotta head from Iwinrin Grove near Ife, the Apapa Hoard from Lagos and other mediaeval bronze hoards from Allabia and the For\u00e7ados River in southern Nigeria, an Ikom monolith from Cross River State, several ancestral screens from the Kalabari tribe in the Niger Delta, the Torday collection of central African sculpture, textiles and weaponry from the Kuba Kingdom including three royal figures, the unique Luzira Head from Uganda, processional crosses and other ecclesiastical and royal material from Gondar and Magdala, Ethiopia following the British Expedition to Abyssinia, excavated objects from Great Zimbabwe (that includes a unique soapstone, anthropomorphic figure) and satellite towns such as Mutare including a large hoard of Iron Age soapstone figures, a rare divining bowl from the Venda peoples and cave paintings and petroglyphs from South Africa.\nOceania\nThe British Museum's Oceanic collections originate from the vast area of the Pacific Ocean, stretching from Papua New Guinea to Easter Island, from New Zealand to Hawaii. The three main anthropological groups represented in the collection are Polynesia, Melanesia and Micronesia \u2013 Aboriginal art from Australia is considered separately in its own right. Metal working was not indigenous to Oceania before Europeans arrived, so many of the artefacts from the collection are made from stone, shell, bone and bamboo. Prehistoric objects from the region include a bird-shaped pestle and a group of stone mortars from Papua New Guinea. The British Museum is fortunate in having some of the earliest Oceanic and Pacific collections, many of which were put together by members of Cook's and Vancouver's expeditions or by colonial administrators and explorers such as Sir George Grey, Sir Frederick Broome, Joseph Bradshaw, Robert Christison, Gregory Mathews, Frederick Meinertzhagen, Thomas Mitchell and Arthur Gordon, before Western culture significantly impacted on indigenous cultures. The department has also benefited greatly from the legacy of pioneering anthropologists such as AC Haddon, Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski and Katherine Routledge. A poignant artefact is the wooden shield found near Botany Bay during Cook's first voyage in 1770. There is some debate as to whether this shield was indeed found at Botany Bay or, given the nature of the wood being red mangrove which grows abundantly only 500km north of Botany Bay, possibly obtained through trade networks or at an entirely different location (a view which is advocated for by Nugent and Sculthorpe, two historians who are often cited by the British Museum). The Wilson cabinet of curiosities from Palau is an example of pre-contact ware. Another outstanding exemplar is the mourner's dress from Tahiti given to Cook on his second voyage, one of only ten in existence. In the collection is a large war canoe from the island of Vella Lavella in the Solomon Islands, one of the last ever to be built in the archipelago. In addition, the M\u0101ori collection is the finest outside New Zealand with many intricately carved wooden and jade objects and the Aboriginal art collection is distinguished by its wide range of bark paintings, including two very early bark etchings collected by John Hunter Kerr. A particularly important group of objects was purchased from the London Missionary Society in 1911, that includes the unique statue of A'a from Rurutu Island, the rare idol from the isle of Mangareva and the Cook Islands deity figure. Other highlights include the huge Hawaiian statue of K\u016b-ka-ili-moku or god of war (one of three extant in the world) and the famous Easter Island statues Hoa Hakananai'a and Moai Hava.\nAmericas\nThe Americas collection mainly consists of 19th and 20th century items although the Paracas, Moche, Inca, Maya, Aztec, Taino and other early cultures are well represented. The Kayung totem pole, which was made in the late nineteenth century on Haida Gwaii, dominates the Great Court and provides a fitting introduction to this very wide-ranging collection that stretches from the very north of the North American continent where the Inuit population has lived for centuries, to the tip of South America where indigenous tribes have long thrived in Patagonia. Highlights of the collection include Aboriginal Canadian and Native American objects from North America collected by the 5th Earl of Lonsdale, the Marquis of Lorne, the explorer David Haig-Thomas and Bryan Mullanphy, Mayor of St. Louis, the Squier and Davis collection of prehistoric mound relics from North America, two carved stone bowls in the form of a seated human figure made by ancient North West Coast peoples from British Columbia, the headdress of Chief Yellow Calf from the Arapaho tribe in Wyoming, a lidded rivercane basket from South Carolina and the earliest historic example of Cherokee basketery, a selection of pottery vessels found in prehistoric dwellings at Mesa Verde and Casas Grandes, one of the enigmatic crystal skulls of unknown origin, a collection of nine turquoise Aztec mosaics from Mexico (the largest in Europe), important artefacts from Teotihuacan and Isla de Sacrificios, several rare pre-Columbian manuscripts including the Codex Zouche-Nuttall and Codex Waecker-Gotter and post-colonial ones such as the Codex Aubin and Codex Kingsborough, a spectacular series of Mayan lintels from Yaxchilan excavated by the British Mayanist Alfred Maudslay, a very high quality Mayan collection that includes sculptures from Copan, Tikal, Tulum, Pusilha, Naranjo and Nebaj (including the celebrated Fenton Vase), an ornate calcite vase with jaguar handles from the Ulua Valley in Honduras, the Lord Moyne collection from the Bay Islands, Honduras and Boyle collection from Nicarugua, over 20 stone metates with zoomorphic and anthropomorphic ornamentation from Costa Rica, a group of Zemi Figures from Vere, Jamaica, wooden duhos from the Dominican Republic and The Bahamas, a collection of Pre-Columbian human mummies from sites across South America including Ancon, Acari, Arica and Leyva, a number of prestigious pre-Columbian gold and votive objects from Colombia, three axe-shaped gold diadems found near Caman\u00e1 from the Siguas culture in Peru, ethnographic objects from across the Amazon region including the Schomburgk and Maybury Lewis collections and part of the von Martius and von Spix collection, two rare Tiwanaku pottery vessels from Lake Titicaca and important items from Tierra del Fuego donated by Commander Phillip Parker King.\nDepartment of Coins and Medals.\nThe British Museum is home to one of the world's finest numismatic collections, comprising about a million objects, including coins, medals, tokens and paper money. The collection spans the entire history of coinage from its origins in the 7th century BC to the present day and is representative of both the East and West. The Department of Coins and Medals was created in 1861 and celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2011.\nDepartment of Conservation and Scientific Research.\nThis department was founded in 1920. Conservation has six specialist areas: ceramics &amp; glass; metals; organic material (including textiles); stone, wall paintings and mosaics; Eastern pictorial art and Western pictorial art. The science department has and continues to develop techniques to date artefacts, analyse and identify the materials used in their manufacture, to identify the place an artefact originated and the techniques used in their creation. The department also publishes its findings and discoveries.\nLibraries and archives.\nThis department covers all levels of education, from casual visitors, schools, degree level and beyond. The museum's various libraries hold in excess of 350,000 books, journals and pamphlets covering all areas of the museum's collection. Also the general museum archives which date from its foundation in 1753 are overseen by this department; the individual departments have their own separate archives and libraries covering their various areas of responsibility, which can be consulted by the public on application. The Anthropology Library is especially large, with 120,000 volumes. However, the Paul Hamlyn Library, which had become the central reference library of the British Museum and the only library there freely open to the general public, closed permanently in August 2011. The website and online database of the collection also provide increasing amounts of information.\nBritish Museum Press.\nThe British Museum Press (BMP) is the publishing business and a division of the British Museum Company Ltd., a company and a charity (established in 1973) wholly owned by the trustees of the British Museum.\nThe BMP publishes both popular and scholarly illustrated books to accompany the exhibition programme and explore aspects of the general collection. Profits from their sales goes to support the British Museum.\nScholarly titles are published in the Research Publications series, all of which are peer-reviewed. This series was started in 1978 and was originally called Occasional Papers. The series is designed to disseminate research on items in the collection. Between six and eight titles are published each year in this series.\nControversies.\nArtefacts taken from other countries.\nIt is a point of controversy whether museums should be allowed to possess artefacts taken from other countries, and the British Museum is a notable target for criticism. The Elgin Marbles, Benin Bronzes, Ethiopian Tabots and the Rosetta Stone are among the most disputed objects in its collections, and organisations have been formed demanding the return of these artefacts to their native countries of Greece, Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Egypt respectively. Parthenon Marbles claimed by Greece were also claimed by UNESCO among others for restitution. From 1801 to 1812, Elgin's agents took about half of the surviving sculptures of the Parthenon, as well as sculptures from the Propylaea and Erechtheum.\nIn recent years, controversies pertaining to reparation of artefacts taken from the Old Summer Palace in Beijing during the Anglo-French invasion of China in 1860 have also begun to surface. Victor Hugo condemned the French and British for their plundering. The British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, among others, have been asked since 2009 to open their archives for investigation by a team of Chinese investigators as a part of an international mission to document lost national treasures. However, there have been fears that the United Kingdom may be asked to return these treasures. , Neil MacGregor, the former Director of the British Museum, said he hoped that both British and Chinese investigators would work together on the controversial collection, which continues to result in resentment in China.\nThe British Museum has refused to return these artefacts, stating that the \"restitutionist premise, that whatever was made in a country must return to an original geographical site, would empty both the British Museum and the other great museums of the world\". The museum has also argued that the British Museum Act of 1963 legally prevents any object from leaving its collection once it has entered it. The law here permits the Trustees of the British Museum to do very little, allowing repatriation of objects only in physical decay, duplicates, pre-1850 and is copiable. A broadening of this law would require the act to be revised/repealed by another act, which needs a majority vote in British Parliament. Nevertheless, it has returned items such as the Tasmanian Ashes after a 20-year-long battle with Australia.\nBag searches.\nIn 2016, the British Museum moved its bag searches to marquees in the front courtyard and beside the rear entrance. This has been criticised by heritage groups as out-of-character with the historic building. The British Museum clarified that the change was purely logistical to save space in the main museum entrance and did not reflect any escalation in threat.\nBP sponsorship.\nThe British Museum's relationship with the oil company BP, which has been a longstanding sponsor of the Museum, has been a source of controversy.\nIn May 2016, the British Museum was temporarily closed after Greenpeace climbers unfurled eight banners down the front columns of the British Museum in protest at BP's sponsorship of an exhibition about Ancient Egypt.\nIn February 2019, hundreds of people occupied the British Museum in protest against BP's longstanding sponsorship of the Museum. Protestors also drew attention to the fact that BP lobbied the UK government to help it gain access to Iraq's oil reserves prior to Britain's invasion in 2003.\nIn July 2019, Ahdaf Soueif resigned from the British Museum's board of trustees in response to its \"immovable\" position on its sponsorship deal with BP. Soueif claimed that the money BP provided to support British Museum exhibitions could be obtained elsewhere.\nIn February 2020, 1,500 demonstrators, including British Museum staff, took part in a day of protest about the BP sponsorship, occupying 11 of the museum's rooms. Protesters also smuggled a four-metre Trojan horse on to the museum's forecourt. The PCS union said the museum had a duty to recognise the escalating climate crisis and cut its ties with BP. In reply the museum said: \u201cWe are aware of the comments from the PCS union and will continue to liaise with the British Museum PCS branch and our staff more generally.\u201d\nTrustee appointment.\nAccording to \"The Guardian\", the UK government rejected the appointment of classicist Mary Beard as a British Museum trustee in 2019, due to her pro-European beliefs. This was a departure from the government's usual hands-off approach to the running of the museum. The newspaper said the British Museum subsequently planned to appoint her as one of the five trustees it does not need government approval for.\nGalleries.\n\"Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan\"\n\"Department of the Middle East\"\n\"Department of Greece and Rome\"\nDigital and online.\nThe museum has a collaboration with the Google Cultural Institute to bring the collection online.\nExhibitions.\n\"Forgotten Empire Exhibition\" (October 2005 \u2013 January 2006)"}
{"id": "4676", "revid": "40799296", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4676", "title": "Bloody Sunday", "text": "Bloody Sunday may refer to:"}
{"id": "4677", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4677", "title": "Binomial theorem", "text": "In elementary algebra, the binomial theorem (or binomial expansion) describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial. According to the theorem, it is possible to expand the polynomial into a sum involving terms of the form , where the exponents and are nonnegative integers with , and the coefficient of each term is a specific positive integer depending on and . For example (for ),\nThe coefficient in the term of is known as the binomial coefficient formula_2 or formula_3 (the two have the same value). These coefficients for varying and can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle. These numbers also arise in combinatorics, where formula_2 gives the number of different combinations of elements that can be chosen from an -element set. Therefore formula_2 is often pronounced as \" choose \".\nHistory.\nSpecial cases of the binomial theorem were known since at least the 4th century BC when Greek mathematician Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent\u00a0. There is evidence that the binomial theorem for cubes was known by the 6th century AD in India.\nBinomial coefficients, as combinatorial quantities expressing the number of ways of selecting objects out of without replacement, were of interest to ancient Indian mathematicians. The earliest known reference to this combinatorial problem is the \"Chanda\u1e25\u015b\u0101stra\" by the Indian lyricist Pingala (c. 200 BC), which contains a method for its solution. The commentator Halayudha from the 10th century AD explains this method using what is now known as Pascal's triangle. By the 6th century AD, the Indian mathematicians probably knew how to express this as a quotient formula_6, and a clear statement of this rule can be found in the 12th century text \"Lilavati\" by Bhaskara.\nThe first formulation of the binomial theorem and the table of binomial coefficients, to our knowledge, can be found in a work by Al-Karaji, quoted by Al-Samaw'al in his \"al-Bahir\". Al-Karaji described the triangular pattern of the binomial coefficients and also provided a mathematical proof of both the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, using an early form of mathematical induction. The Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam was probably familiar with the formula to higher orders, although many of his mathematical works are lost. The binomial expansions of small degrees were known in the 13th century mathematical works of Yang Hui and also Chu Shih-Chieh. Yang Hui attributes the method to a much earlier 11th century text of Jia Xian, although those writings are now also lost.\nIn 1544, Michael Stifel introduced the term \"binomial coefficient\" and showed how to use them to express formula_7 in terms of formula_8, via \"Pascal's triangle\". Blaise Pascal studied the eponymous triangle comprehensively in his \"Trait\u00e9 dus triangle arithm\u00e9tique\". However, the pattern of numbers was already known to the European mathematicians of the late Renaissance, including Stifel, Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia, and Simon Stevin.\nIsaac Newton is generally credited with the generalized binomial theorem, valid for any rational exponent.\nStatement.\nAccording to the theorem, it is possible to expand any nonnegative power of into a sum of the form\nwhere formula_10 is an integer and each formula_11 is a positive integer known as a binomial coefficient. (When an exponent is zero, the corresponding power expression is taken to be 1 and this multiplicative factor is often omitted from the term. Hence one often sees the right side written as formula_12.) This formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity. Using summation notation, it can be written as\nThe final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of and in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetrical. A simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting for , so that it involves only a single variable. In this form, the formula reads\nor equivalently\nExamples.\nHere are the first few cases of the binomial theorem:\nIn general, for the expansion of on the right side in the th row (numbered so that the top row is the 0th row):\nAn example illustrating the last two points:\nwith formula_18.\nA simple example with a specific positive value of :\nA simple example with a specific negative value of :\nGeometric explanation.\nFor positive values of and , the binomial theorem with is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side can be cut into a square of side , a square of side , and two rectangles with sides and . With , the theorem states that a cube of side can be cut into a cube of side , a cube of side , three rectangular boxes, and three rectangular boxes.\nIn calculus, this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative formula_21 if one sets formula_22 and formula_23 interpreting as an infinitesimal change in , then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an -dimensional hypercube, formula_24 where the coefficient of the linear term (in formula_25) is formula_26 the area of the faces, each of dimension :\nSubstituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms, formula_28 and higher, become negligible, and yields the formula formula_29 interpreted as\nIf one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus, one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula, the integral formula_30 \u2013 see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details.\nBinomial coefficients.\nThe coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients. These are usually written formula_31 and pronounced \" choose \".\nFormulae.\nThe coefficient of is given by the formula\nwhich is defined in terms of the factorial function . Equivalently, this formula can be written\nwith factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction. Although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient formula_34 is actually an integer.\nCombinatorial interpretation.\nThe binomial coefficient formula_11 can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose elements from an -element set. This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write as a product\nthen, according to the distributive law, there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either or from each of the binomials of the product. For example, there will only be one term , corresponding to choosing from each binomial. However, there will be several terms of the form , one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a . Therefore, after combining like terms, the coefficient of will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly elements from an -element set.\nProofs.\nCombinatorial proof.\nExample.\nThe coefficient of in\nequals formula_38 because there are three strings of length 3 with exactly two s, namely,\ncorresponding to the three 2-element subsets of , namely,\nwhere each subset specifies the positions of the in a corresponding string.\nGeneral case.\nExpanding yields the sum of the products of the form where each is or\u00a0. Rearranging factors shows that each product equals for some between and\u00a0. For a given , the following are proved equal in succession:\nThis proves the binomial theorem.\nInductive proof.\nInduction yields another proof of the binomial theorem. When , both sides equal , since and formula_44 Now suppose that the equality holds for a given ; we will prove it for . For , let denote the coefficient of in the polynomial . By the inductive hypothesis, is a polynomial in and such that is formula_34 if , and otherwise. The identity\nshows that is also a polynomial in and , and\nsince if , then and . Now, the right hand side is\nby Pascal's identity. On the other hand, if , then and , so we get . Thus\nwhich is the inductive hypothesis with substituted for and so completes the inductive step.\nGeneralizations.\nNewton's generalized binomial theorem.\nAround 1665, Isaac Newton generalized the binomial theorem to allow real exponents other than nonnegative integers. (The same generalization also applies to complex exponents.) In this generalization, the finite sum is replaced by an infinite series. In order to do this, one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the usual formula with factorials. However, for an arbitrary number , one can define\nwhere formula_51 is the Pochhammer symbol, here standing for a falling factorial. This agrees with the usual definitions when is a nonnegative integer. Then, if and are real numbers with , and is any complex number, one has\nWhen is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for are zero, so this equation reduces to the usual binomial theorem, and there are at most nonzero terms. For other values of , the series typically has infinitely many nonzero terms.\nFor example, gives the following series for the square root:\nTaking , the generalized binomial series gives the geometric series formula, valid for :\nMore generally, with :\nSo, for instance, when ,\nFurther generalizations.\nThe generalized binomial theorem can be extended to the case where and are complex numbers. For this version, one should again assume and define the powers of and using a holomorphic branch of log defined on an open disk of radius centered at . The generalized binomial theorem is valid also for elements and of a Banach algebra as long as , and is invertible, and .\nA version of the binomial theorem is valid for the following Pochhammer symbol-like family of polynomials: for a given real constant , define formula_57 and\nfor formula_59 Then\nThe case recovers the usual binomial theorem.\nMore generally, a sequence formula_61 of polynomials is said to be binomial if\nAn operator formula_69 on the space of polynomials is said to be the \"basis operator\" of the sequence formula_61 if formula_71 and formula_72 for all formula_73. A sequence formula_61 is binomial if and only if its basis operator is a Delta operator. Writing formula_75 for the shift by formula_76 operator, the Delta operators corresponding to the above \"Pochhammer\" families of polynomials are the backward difference formula_77 for formula_78, the ordinary derivative for formula_79, and the forward difference formula_80 for formula_81.\nMultinomial theorem.\nThe binomial theorem can be generalized to include powers of sums with more than two terms. The general version is\nwhere the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices through such that the sum of all is\u00a0. (For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to\u00a0). The coefficients formula_83 are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula\nCombinatorially, the multinomial coefficient formula_85 counts the number of different ways to partition an -element set into disjoint subsets of sizes .\nMulti-binomial theorem.\nWhen working in more dimensions, it is often useful to deal with products of binomial expressions. By the binomial theorem this is equal to\nThis may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation, as\nGeneral Leibniz rule.\nThe general Leibniz rule gives the th derivative of a product of two functions in a form similar to that of the binomial theorem: \nHere, the superscript indicates the th derivative of a function. If one sets and , and then cancels the common factor of from both sides of the result, the ordinary binomial theorem is recovered.\nApplications.\nMultiple-angle identities.\nFor the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with de Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine. According to De Moivre's formula,\nUsing the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for and . For example, since\nDe Moivre's formula tells us that\nwhich are the usual double-angle identities. Similarly, since\nDe Moivre's formula yields\nIn general,\nand\nSeries for \"e\".\nThe number is often defined by the formula\nApplying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for . In particular:\nThe th term of this sum is\nAs , the rational expression on the right approaches , and therefore\nThis indicates that can be written as a series:\nIndeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of , it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to\u00a0.\nProbability.\nThe binomial theorem is closely related to the probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution. The probability of a (countable) collection of independent Bernoulli trials formula_101 with probability of success formula_102 all not happening is\nIn abstract algebra.\nThe binomial theorem is valid more generally for two elements and in a ring, or even a semiring, provided that . For example, it holds for two matrices, provided that those matrices commute; this is useful in computing powers of a matrix.\nThe binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence is of binomial type."}
{"id": "4678", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4678", "title": "Bitmap font", "text": ""}
{"id": "4680", "revid": "253891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4680", "title": "Balboa", "text": "Balboa may refer to:"}
{"id": "4681", "revid": "35777800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4681", "title": "Boxing Day", "text": "Boxing Day is a holiday celebrated the day after Christmas Day, occurring on the second day of Christmastide. Though it originated as a holiday to give gifts to the poor, today Boxing Day is primarily known as a shopping holiday. It originated in the United Kingdom and is celebrated in a number of countries that previously formed part of the British Empire. Boxing Day is on 26 December, although the attached bank holiday or public holiday may take place either on that day or one or two days later (if necessary to ensure it falls on a weekday). Boxing Day is also concurrent with the Christian holiday Saint Stephen's Day.\nIn parts of Europe, such as Bulgaria, Catalonia, Czechia, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Scandinavia, 26 December is celebrated as a second Christmas Day.\nEtymology.\nThere are competing theories for the origins of the term, none of which is definitive.\nThe European tradition of giving money and other gifts to those in need, or in service positions, has been dated to the Middle Ages, but the exact origin is unknown. It is sometimes believed to be in reference to the Alms Box placed in the narthex of Christian churches to collect donations to the poor. The tradition may come from a custom in the late Roman/early Christian era wherein alms boxes placed in churches were used to collect special offerings tied to the Feast of Saint Stephen, which, in the Western Christian Churches, falls on the same day as Boxing Day, the second day of Christmastide. On this day, it is customary in some localities for the alms boxes to be opened and distributed to the poor.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives the earliest attestations from Britain in the 1830s, defining it as \"the first weekday after Christmas day, observed as a holiday on which postmen, errand boys, and servants of various kinds expect to receive a Christmas box\".\nThe term \"Christmas box\" dates back to the 17th century, and among other things meant:\nA present or gratuity given at Christmas: in Great Britain, usually confined to gratuities given to those who are supposed to have a vague claim upon the donor for services rendered to him as one of the general public by whom they are employed and paid, or as a customer of their legal employer; the undefined theory being that as they have done offices for this person, for which he has not directly paid them, some direct acknowledgement is becoming at Christmas.\nIn Britain, it was a custom for tradesmen to collect \"Christmas boxes\" of money or presents on the first weekday after Christmas as thanks for good service throughout the year. This is mentioned in Samuel Pepys' diary entry for 19 December 1663. This custom is linked to an older British tradition where the servants of the wealthy were allowed the next day to visit their families since they would have had to serve their masters on Christmas Day. The employers would give each servant a box to take home containing gifts, bonuses, and sometimes leftover food. Until the late 20th century there continued to be a tradition among many in the UK to give a Christmas gift, usually cash, to vendors, although not on Boxing Day as many would not work on that day.\nIn South Africa, vendors who normally have little interaction with those they serve are accustomed to knock on the vendors' doors to ask for a \"Christmas box\", being a small cash donation, in the weeks before or after Christmas. This practice has become controversial and some municipalities have banned their staff from asking for Christmas boxes.\nDate.\nBoxing Day is traditionally celebrated on 26 December, the day after Christmas Day, though many people hold\u2014and there is documentary assertion\u2014that it would not fall on a Sunday (Sunday being the day of worship), and consequently Monday 27 December would be Boxing Day. Saint Stephen's Day, a religious holiday, also falls on 26 December.\nStatus by country.\nIn Australia, Boxing Day is a public holiday in all jurisdictions except the state of South Australia, where a public holiday known as Proclamation Day is celebrated on the first weekday after Christmas Day or the Christmas Day holiday. Every year a test cricket match is played at the Melbourne Cricket Ground starting on Boxing day.\nIn Canada, Boxing Day () is a federal statutory holiday. Government offices, banks and postal services are closed. In Ontario, it is a provincial statutory holiday.\nIn Hong Kong, despite the transfer of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997, Boxing Day is a general holiday as the first weekday after Christmas.\nIn Ireland, when the entire island was part of the United Kingdom, the Bank Holidays Act 1871 established the feast day of Saint Stephen as a non-moveable public holiday on 26 December. Following partition in 1920, Northern Ireland reverted to the British name, Boxing Day. In East Donegal and Inishowen, the day is also popularly known as Boxing Day.\nIn New Zealand, Boxing Day is a statutory holiday. On these holidays, people who must work receive 1 1/2 times their salaries and a day in lieu is provided to employees who work.\nIn Nigeria, Boxing Day is a public holiday for working people and students. When it falls on a Saturday or Sunday, there is always a holiday on Monday.\nIn Scotland, Boxing Day has been specified as an additional bank holiday since 1974, by royal proclamation under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971.\nIn Singapore, Boxing Day was a public holiday for working people and students; when it fell on a Saturday or Sunday, there was a holiday on Monday. However, in recent years this tradition has ceased in Singapore.\nIn South Africa, the Day of Goodwill, which falls on 26 December, is a public holiday.\nIn Trinidad and Tobago, Boxing Day is a public holiday.\nIn the UK, 26 December (unless it is a Sunday) has been a bank holiday since 1871. When 26 December falls on a Saturday, the associated public holiday is on the following Monday. When 26 December falls on a Sunday, the public holiday is the following Tuesday, Monday being the public holiday associated with Christmas Day.\nIn the British overseas territory of Bermuda, the costumed Gombey dancers perform throughout the mid-Atlantic island on Boxing Day, a tradition believed to date back to the 18th century when slaves were permitted to gather at Christmastime.\nIn Massachusetts, Governor William F. Weld declared every 26 December is Boxing Day, in response to the efforts of a coalition of British citizens to \"transport the English tradition to the United States\", but not an employee holiday.\nShopping.\nIn the UK, Canada, Australia, Trinidad and Tobago, and New Zealand, Boxing Day is primarily known as a shopping holiday. Boxing Day sales are common and shops often allow dramatic price reductions. For many merchants, Boxing Day has become the day of the year with the greatest revenue. In the UK in 2009 it was estimated that up to 12 million shoppers appeared at the sales (a rise of almost 20% compared to 2008, although this was also affected by the fact that the VAT was about to revert to 17.5% from 1 January, following the temporary reduction to 15%).\nMany retailers open very early (typically 5\u00a0am or even earlier) and offer doorbuster deals and loss leaders to draw people to their stores. It is not uncommon for long queues to form early in the morning of 26 December, hours before the opening of shops holding the big sales, especially at big-box consumer electronics retailers. Many stores have a limited quantity of big draw or deeply discounted items. Because of the shoulder-to-shoulder crowds, many choose to stay at home and avoid the hectic shopping experience. Local media often covers the event, mentioning how early the shoppers began queuing up, and showing video of shoppers queuing and later leaving with their purchased items. Many retailers have implemented practices aimed at managing large numbers of shoppers. They may limit entrances, restrict the number of patrons in a store at a time, provide tickets to people at the head of the queue to guarantee them a hot ticket item, or canvass queued-up shoppers to inform them of inventory limitations.\nIn some areas of Canada, particularly in Atlantic Canada and parts of Northern Ontario, most retailers are prohibited from opening on Boxing Day, either by provincial law or by municipal bylaw, or by informal agreement among major retailers, in order to provide a day of relaxation following Christmas Day. In these areas, sales otherwise scheduled for 26 December are moved to the 27th. The city council of Greater Sudbury, Ontario, which was the largest city in Canada to maintain this restriction as of the early 2010s, formally repealed its store hours bylaw on 9 December 2014.\nWhile Boxing Day is 26 December, many retailers will run the sales for several days before or after 26 December, often up to New Year's Eve, branding it as \"Boxing Week\". Notably, in the recession of late 2008, a record number of retailers held early promotions due to a weak economy. In 2009, many retailers with both online and High Street stores launched their online sales on Christmas Eve and their High Street sales on Boxing Day.\nDecline.\nThe tradition has been compared to the U.S. phenomenon of Black Friday \u2013 the Friday following the Thanksgiving holiday in late-November \u2013 which is usually considered the first day of the Christmas shopping season. In the late-2000s, when the Canadian and U.S. dollar were near parity, Canadian retailers began to hold Black Friday promotions to attract consumers who would otherwise travel across the border to visit U.S. stores. This has lessened the appeal of Boxing Day in Canada somewhat, as it was overtaken by Black Friday in terms of sales by 2013.\nIn the 2010s, many British retailers also began to import the Black Friday tradition, led primarily by retailers with American ownership such as Amazon and Asda (the latter owned by the U.S.-based Walmart). In 2015, British retail sales in November overtook sales in December for the first time. In 2019, a retail analysis firm estimated that there was a 9.8% drop in British store traffic on Boxing Day in comparison to 2018 (the largest year-over-year drop since 2010), citing several factors, such as the weather, the increased prominence of online shopping, uncertainties in the wake of the general election, and the growing prominence of Black Friday sales.\nBoxing Day sales are not a prominent tradition in the United States, although many retailers often begin after-Christmas sales that day. It is typically the earliest starting day after Christmas for people to return unwanted gifts for exchanges or refunds, and to redeem gift cards.\nSport.\nIn the United Kingdom, it is traditional for all top-tier football leagues in England, Scotland, and Northern Ireland \u2013 the Premier League, the Scottish Premiership, and the NIFL Premiership \u2013 and the lower ones, as well as the rugby leagues, to hold a full programme of football matches on Boxing Day. Originally, matches on Boxing Day were played against local rivals to avoid teams and their fans having to travel a long distance to an away game on the day after Christmas Day. Prior to the formation of leagues, a number of traditional rugby union fixtures took place on Boxing Day each year, notably Llanelli v London Welsh and Leicester v The Barbarians.\nIn Italy, Boxing Day football was played for the first time in the 2018/19 Serie A season. The experiment was successful, with Italian stadiums 69% full on average \u2013 more than any other matchday in December 2018.\nIn rugby league, festive fixtures were a staple of the traditional winter season. Since the transition to a summer season in the 1990s, no formal fixtures are now arranged on Boxing Day but some clubs, such as Wakefield Trinity, arrange a traditional local derby friendly fixture instead.\nIn Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, Test cricket matches are played on Boxing Day. For more details see Boxing Day Test.\nIn Australia, the first day of the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne and the start of the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race are on Boxing Day.\nIn horse racing, there is the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park Racecourse in Surrey, England. It is the second most prestigious chase in Britain, after the Cheltenham Gold Cup. In addition to the prestigious race at Kempton, in Britain, it is usually the day with the highest number of racing meetings of the year, with eight in 2016, in addition to three more in Ireland. In Barbados, the final day of horse racing is held on Boxing Day at The Historic Garrison Savannah, a UNESCO world heritage site. This tradition has been going on for decades in this former British colony.\nBoxing Day is one of the main days in the hunting calendar for hunts in the UK and US, with most hunts (both mounted foxhound or harrier packs and foot packs of beagles or bassets) holding meets, often in town or village centres.\nSeveral ice hockey contests are associated with the day. The IIHF World U20 Championship typically begins on 26 December, while the Spengler Cup also begins on 23 December in Davos, Switzerland; the Spengler Cup competition includes HC Davos, Team Canada, and other top European Hockey teams. The National Hockey League traditionally had close to a full slate of games (10 were played in 2011), following the league-wide days off given for Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. However, the 2013 collective bargaining agreement (which followed a lock-out) extended the league mandate of Christmas Eve and Christmas Day off to include Boxing Day, except when it falls on a Saturday, in which case the league can choose to make 23 December a league-wide off day instead for that year.\nIn some African Commonwealth nations, particularly Ghana, Uganda, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania, professional boxing contests are held on Boxing Day. This practice has also been followed for decades in Guyana and Italy.\nA notable tradition in Sweden is \"\", which formerly marked the start of the bandy season and always draws large crowds. Games traditionally begin at 1:15\u00a0pm."}
{"id": "4687", "revid": "38281144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4687", "title": "Balochistan, Pakistan", "text": "Balochistan (; ) \nis one of the four provinces of Pakistan. It is the largest province in terms of land area, forming the southwestern region of the country, but is the least populated. Its provincial capital and largest city is Quetta.\nBalochistan shares borders with Punjab and the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to the northeast, Sindh to the east and southeast, the Arabian Sea to the south, Iran to the west and Afghanistan to the north and northwest.\nThe main ethnic groups in the province are the Baloch people and the Pashtuns, who constitute 52% and 36% of the population respectively (according to the preliminary 2011 census). The remaining 12% comprises smaller communities of Brahuis, Hazaras along with other settlers such as Sindhis, Punjabis, Uzbeks and Turkmens. The name \"Balochistan\" means \"the land of the Baloch\". Largely underdeveloped, its provincial economy is dominated by natural resources, especially its natural gas fields, estimated to have sufficient capacity to supply Pakistan's demands over the medium to long term. Aside from Quetta, the second-largest city of the province is Turbat in the south, while another area of major economic importance is Gwadar Port on the Arabian Sea.\nBalochistan is noted for its unique culture and extremely dry desert climate.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBalochistan occupies the very southeasternmost portion of the Iranian Plateau, the setting for the earliest known farming settlements in the pre-Indus Valley Civilisation era, the earliest of which was Mehrgarh, dated at 7000 BC, within the province. Balochistan marked the westernmost extent of the Civilisation. Centuries before the arrival of Islam in the 7th Century, parts of Balochistan was ruled by the Paratarajas, an Indo-Scythian dynasty. At certain times, the Kushans also held political sway in parts of Balochistan.\nThe Hindu Sewa Dynasty ruled parts of Balochistan, chiefly Kalat. The Sibi Division, which was carved out of Quetta Division and Kalat Division in 1974, derives its name from Rani Sewi, the queen of the Sewa dynasty.\nA theory of the origin of the Baloch people, the largest ethnic group in the region, is that they are of Median descent.\nArrival of Islam.\nIn 654, Abdulrehman ibn Samrah, governor of Sistan and the newly emerged Rashidun caliphate at the expense of Sassanid Persia and the Byzantine Empire, sent an Islamic army to crush a revolt in Zaranj, which is now in southern Afghanistan. After conquering Zaranj, a column of the army pushed north, conquering Kabul and Ghazni, in the Hindu Kush mountain range, while another column moved through Quetta District in north-western Balochistan and conquered the area up to the ancient cities of \"Dawar\" and \"Qandabil\" (Bolan). It is documented that the major settlements, falling within today's province, became in 654 controlled by the Rashidun caliphate, except for the well-defended mountain town of \"QaiQan\" which is now Kalat.\nDuring the caliphate of Ali, a revolt broke out in southern Balochistan's Makran region. In 663, during the reign of Umayyad Caliph Muawiyah I, his Muslim rule lost control of north-eastern Balochistan and Kalat when Haris ibn Marah and a large part of his army died in battle against a revolt in Kalat.\nPre-modern era.\nIn the 15th century, Mir Chakar Khan Rind became the first Sirdar of Afghani, Irani and Pakistani Balochistan. He was a close aide of the Timurid ruler Humayun, and was succeeded by the Khanate of Kalat, which owed allegiance to the Mughal Empire. Later, Nader Shah won the allegiance of the rulers of eastern Balochistan. He ceded Kalhora, one of the Sindh territories of Sibi-Kachi, to the Khanate of Kalat. Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Empire, also won the allegiance of that area's rulers, and many Baloch fought under him during the Third Battle of Panipat. Most of the area would eventually revert to local Baloch control after Afghan rule.\nBritish Indian era.\nIn the 1870s, Baluchistan came under control of the British Indian Empire in colonial India. During this time from the fall of the Durrani Empire in 1823, four princely states were recognised and reinforced in Balochistan: Makran, Kharan, Las Bela and Kalat. In 1876, Robert Sandeman negotiated the Treaty of Kalat, which brought the Khan's territories, including Kharan, Makran, and Las Bela, under British protection even though they remained independent princely states. After the Second Afghan War was ended by the Treaty of Gandamak in May 1879, the Afghan Emir ceded the districts of Quetta, Pishin, Harnai, Sibi and Thal Chotiali to British control. On 1 April 1883, the British took control of the Bolan Pass, south-east of Quetta, from the Khan of Kalat. In 1887, small additional areas of Balochistan were declared British territory. In 1893, Sir Mortimer Durand negotiated an agreement with the Amir of Afghanistan, Abdur Rahman Khan, to fix the Durand Line running from Chitral to Balochistan as the boundary between the Emirate of Afghanistan and British-controlled areas. Two devastating earthquakes occurred in Balochistan during British colonial rule: the 1935 Quetta earthquake, which devastated Quetta, and the 1945 Balochistan earthquake with its epicentre in the Makran region. During the time of the Indian independence movement, \"three pro-Congress parties were still active in Balochistan's politics\", such as the Anjuman-i-Watan Baluchistan, which favoured a united India and opposed its partition.\nAfter independence.\nBalochistan contained a Chief Commissioner's province and four princely states under the British Raj in colonial India. The province's Shahi Jirga and the non-official members of the Quetta Municipality opted for Pakistan unanimously on 29 June 1947. Three of the princely states, Makran, Las Bela and Kharan, acceded to Pakistan in 1947 after independence. But the ruler of the fourth princely state, the Khan of Kalat, Ahmad Yar Khan, who used to call Jinnah his 'father', declared Kalat's independence as this was one of the options given to all of the 565 princely states by British Prime Minister Clement Attlee.\nKalat finally acceded to Pakistan on 27 March 1948 after period of negotiations with Pakistan. The signing of the Instrument of Accession by Ahmad Yar Khan, led his brother, Prince Abdul Karim, to revolt against his brother's decision due to their family rift. in July 1948. Princes Agha Abdul Karim Baloch and Muhammad Rahim, refused to lay down arms, leading the Dosht-e Jhalawan in unconventional attacks on the army until 1950. The Prince indulged in Terror activities without any assistance from others. Jinnah and his successors allowed Yar Khan to retain his title until the province's dissolution in 1955.\nInsurgencies by Baloch nationalists took place in 1948, 1958\u201359, 1962\u201363 and 1973\u201377 \u2013 with a new ongoing insurgency by autonomy-seeking Baloch groups since 2003. While a few Baloch support the demand for autonomy, the majority are not interested in seceding from Pakistan.\nAt a press conference on 8 June 2015 in Quetta, Balochistan's Home Minister Sarfraz Bugti accused India's prime minister Narendra Modi of openly supporting terrorism. Bugti implicated India's Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) of being responsible for recent attacks at military bases in Smangli and Khalid, and for subverting the China\u2013Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) agreement.\nGeography.\nBalochistan is situated in the southwest of Pakistan and covers an area of . It is Pakistan's largest province by area, constituting 44% of Pakistan's total land mass. The province is bordered by Afghanistan to the north and north-west, Iran to the south-west, Punjab and Sindh, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the north-east. To the south lies the Arabian Sea. Balochistan is located on the south-eastern part of the Iranian plateau. It borders the geopolitical regions of the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Central Asia and South Asia. Balochistan lies at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz and provides the shortest route from seaports to Central Asia. Its geographical location has placed the otherwise desolate region in the scope of competing for global interests for all of recorded history.\nThe capital city Quetta is located in a densely populated portion of the Sulaiman Mountains in the north-east of the province. It is situated in a river valley near the Bolan Pass, which has been used as the route of choice from the coast to Central Asia, entering through Afghanistan's Kandahar region. The British and other historic empires have crossed the region to invade Afghanistan by this route.\nBalochistan is rich in exhaustible and renewable resources; it is the second major supplier of natural gas in Pakistan. The province's renewable and human resource potential has not been systematically measured or exploited due to pressures from within and without Pakistan. Local inhabitants have chosen to live in towns and have relied on sustainable water sources for thousands of years.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the upper highlands is characterised by very cold winters and hot summers. In the lower highlands, winters vary from extremely cold in northern districts Ziarat, Quetta, Kalat, Muslim Baagh and Khanozai to milder conditions closer to the Makran coast. Winters are mild on the plains, with temperature never falling below freezing point. Summers are hot and dry, especially in the arid zones of Chagai and Kharan districts. The plains are also very hot in summer, with temperatures reaching . The record highest temperature, , was recorded in Sibi on 26 May 2010, exceeding the previous record, . Other hot areas include Turbat and Dalbandin. The desert climate is characterised by hot and very arid conditions. Occasionally, strong windstorms make these areas very inhospitable.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Balochistan is largely based upon the production of natural gas, coal and other minerals.\nBalochistan has been called a \"neglected province where a majority of population lacks amenities\". Since the mid-1970s the province's share of Pakistan's GDP has dropped from 4.9 to 3.7%, and as of 2007 it had the highest poverty rate and infant and maternal mortality rate, and the lowest literacy rate in the country, factors some allege have contributed to the insurgency. However, in 7th NFC awards, Punjab province and Federal contributed to increase Baluchistan share more than its entitled population based share. In Balochistan poverty is increasing. In 2001\u20132002 poverty incidences were at 48% and by 2005\u20132006 these were at 50.9%. According to a report on Dawn, the rate of multidimensional poverty in Balochistan had risen to 71% by 2016.\nThough the province remains largely underdeveloped, several major development projects, including the construction of a new deep sea port at the strategically important town of Gwadar, are in progress in Balochistan. The port is projected to be the hub of an energy and trade corridor to and from China and the Central Asian republics. The Mirani Dam on the Dasht River, west of Turbat in the Makran Division, is being built to provide water to expand agricultural land use by where it would otherwise be unsustainable. In the district Lasbela, there is an oil refinery owned by Byco International Incorporated (BII), which is capable of processing 120,000 barrels of oil per day. A power station is located adjacent to the refinery. Several cement plants and a marble factory are also located there. One of the world's largest ship breaking yards is located on the coast.\nNatural resource extraction.\nBalochistan's share of Pakistan's national income has historically ranged between 3.7% to 4.9%. Since 1972, Balochistan's gross income has grown in size by 2.7 times. Outside Quetta, the resource extraction infrastructure of the province is gradually developing but still lags far behind other parts of Pakistan.\nThe agreements for royalty rights and ownership of mineral rights were reached during a period of unprecedented natural disasters, economic, social, political, and cultural unrest in Pakistan. The negotiations were widely considered to be insufficiently transparent.\nTourism.\nBalochistan has much tourist potential, though the province has seen little of it. There are many tourism-worthy sites and places within the province. Tourism in Balochistan sharply declined after the 9/11 terror attacks due to terrorism. However, recently, tourism is growing in Balochistan and fights against terrorists have proved successful. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) also aims to revive the growing tourism industry by improving road networks which would generate jobs and income for the Baloch people as well as help Pakistan in improving its GDP.\nPlaces of Interest.\nFollowing is a list of a few tourist attraction and places of interest in Balochistan:\nGovernment and politics.\nIn common with the other provinces of Pakistan, Balochistan has a parliamentary form of government. The ceremonial head of the province is the Governor, who is appointed by the President of Pakistan on the advice of the provincial Chief Minister. The Chief Minister, the province's chief executive, is normally the leader of the largest political party or alliance of parties in the provincial assembly.\nThe unicameral Provincial Assembly of Balochistan comprises 65 seats of which 11 are reserved for women and 3 reserved for non-Muslims. The judicial branch of government is carried out by the Balochistan High Court, which is based in Quetta and headed by a Chief Justice.\nBesides dominant Pakistan-wide political parties (such as the Pakistan Muslim League (N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party), Balochistan nationalist parties (such as the National Party and the Balochistan National Party (Mengal)) have been prominent in the province.\nAdministration.\nFor administrative purposes, the province is divided into six divisions \u2013 Kalat, Makran, Nasirabad, Quetta, Sibi and Zhob. This divisional level was abolished in 2000, but restored after the 2008 election. Each division is under an appointed commissioner. The six divisions are further subdivided into 34 districts:\nDemographics.\nBalochistan's population density is low due to the mountainous terrain and scarcity of water. In March 2012, preliminary census figures showed that the population of Balochistan had reached 13,162,222, not including the districts of Khuzdar, Kech and Panjgur, a 139.3% increase from 5,501,164 in 1998, representing 6.85% of Pakistan's total population. This was the largest increase in population by any province of Pakistan during that time period. Official estimates of Balochistan's population grew from approximately 7.45 million in 2003 to 7.8 million in 2005. The 2017 Census enumerated a population of 12,344,408.\nEthnolinguistic groups.\nIn the 1998 census the Balochi was the main language of Balochistan spoken by 54.8%, Pashto was spoken by 29.6%, Sindhi by 5.6%, Punjabi by 2.5%, Saraiki by 2.4%, Urdu by 1% and Others 4.1%.\nAccording to the Ethnologue, households speaking Balochi, whose primary dialect is Makrani constitutes 13%, Rukhshani 10%, Sulemani 7%, and Khetrani 3% of the population. Other languages spoken are Lasi, Urdu, Punjabi, Hazargi, Sindhi, Saraiki, Dehvari, Dari, Tajik, Hindko, Uzbek, and Hindki. In the Lasbela District, the majority of the population speaks Lasi, which is a dialect of Sindhi.\nBalochi forms majority in 21 districts and Pashtun forms majority in 9 districts of Balochistan.\nThe 2005 census concerning Afghans in Pakistan showed that a total of 769,268 Afghan refugees were temporarily staying in Balochistan. However, there are probably fewer Afghans living in Balochistan today as many refugees repatriated in 2013. As of 2015, there are only 327,778 registered Afghan refugees according to the UNHCR.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 1998 Census, Balochistan had a total population of 6,565,885 of which most (6,484,006) were Muslims. There were also Hindu and Christian minorities in the province. The Hindu population in the province was approximately 39,000 (including the Scheduled Castes). The Shri Hinglaj Mata mandir which is the largest Hindu pilgrimage centre in Pakistan is situated in Balochistan. There was also a Christian minority of 26,462 individuals in the province."}
{"id": "4688", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4688", "title": "William M. Tweed", "text": "William Magear Tweed (April 3, 1823\u00a0\u2013 April 12, 1878), often erroneously referred to as \"William \"Marcy\" Tweed\" (see below), and widely known as \"Boss\" Tweed, was an American politician most notable for being the \"boss\" of Tammany Hall, the Democratic Party political machine that played a major role in the politics of 19th-century New York City and State. At the height of his influence, Tweed was the third-largest landowner in New York City, a director of the Erie Railroad, a director of the Tenth National Bank, a director of the New-York Printing Company, the proprietor of the Metropolitan Hotel, a significant stockholder in iron mines and gas companies, a board member of the Harlem Gas Light Company, a board member of the Third Avenue Railway Company, a board member of the Brooklyn Bridge Company, and the president of the Guardian Savings Bank.\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852 and the New York County Board of Supervisors in 1858, the year that he became the head of the Tammany Hall political machine. He was also elected to the New York State Senate in 1867, but Tweed's greatest influence came from being an appointed member of a number of boards and commissions, his control over political patronage in New York City through Tammany, and his ability to ensure the loyalty of voters through jobs he could create and dispense on city-related projects.\nTweed was convicted for stealing an amount estimated by an aldermen's committee in 1877 at between $25\u00a0million and $45\u00a0million from New York City taxpayers from political corruption, but later estimates ranged as high as $200\u00a0million. Unable to make bail, he escaped from jail once but was returned to custody. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail.\nEarly life and education.\nTweed was born April 3, 1823, at 1 Cherry Street, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. The son of a third-generation Scottish chair-maker, Tweed grew up on Cherry Street. His grandfather arrived in the United States from a town near the River Tweed close to Edinburgh. Tweed's religious affiliation was not widely known in his lifetime, but at the time of his funeral \"The New York Times\", quoting a family friend, reported that his parents had been Quakers and \"members of the old Rose Street Meeting house\". At the age of 11, he left school to learn his father's trade, and then became an apprentice to a saddler. He also studied to be a bookkeeper and worked as a brushmaker for a company he had invested in, before eventually joining in the family business in 1852. On September 29, 1844, he married Mary Jane C. Skaden and lived with her family on Madison Street for two years.\nEarly career.\nTweed became a member of the Odd Fellows and the Masons, and joined a volunteer fire company, Engine No. 12. In 1848, at the invitation of state assemblyman John J. Reilly, he and some friends organized the Americus Fire Company No. 6, also known as the \"Big Six\", as a volunteer fire company, which took as its symbol a snarling red Bengal tiger from a French lithograph, a symbol which remained associated with Tweed and Tammany Hall for many years. At the time, volunteer fire companies competed vigorously with each other; some were connected with street gangs and had strong ethnic ties to various immigrant communities. The competition could become so fierce, that burning buildings would sometimes be ignored as the fire companies fought each other. Tweed became known for his ax-wielding violence, and was soon elected the Big Six foreman. Pressure from Alfred Carlson, the chief engineer, got him thrown out of the crew. However, fire companies were also recruiting grounds for political parties at the time, thus Tweed's exploits came to the attention of the Democratic politicians who ran the Seventh Ward. The Seventh Ward put him up for Alderman in 1850, when Tweed was 26. He lost that election to the Whig candidate Morgan Morgans, but ran again the next year and won, garnering his first political position. Tweed then became associated with the \"Forty Thieves\", the group of aldermen and assistant aldermen who, up to that point, were known as some of the most corrupt politicians in the city's history.\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852, but his two-year term was undistinguished. In an attempt by Republican reformers in Albany, the state capital, to control the Democratic-dominated New York City government, the power of the New York County Board of Supervisors was beefed up. The board had 12 members, six appointed by the mayor and six elected, and in 1858 Tweed was appointed to the board, which became his first vehicle for large-scale graft; Tweed and other supervisors forced vendors to pay a 15% overcharge to their \"ring\" in order to do business with the city. By 1853, Tweed was running the seventh ward for Tammany. The board also had six Democrats and six Republicans, but Tweed often just bought off one Republican to sway the board. One such Republican board member was Peter P. Voorhis, a coal dealer by profession who absented himself from a board meeting in exchange for $2,500 so that the board could appoint city inspectors. Henry Smith was another Republican that was a part of the Tweed ring.\nAlthough he was not trained as a lawyer, Tweed's friend, Judge George G. Barnard, certified him as an attorney, and Tweed opened a law office on Duane Street. He ran for sheriff in 1861 and was defeated, but became the chairman of the Democratic General Committee shortly after the election, and was then chosen to be the head of Tammany's general committee in January 1863. Several months later, in April, he became \"Grand Sachem\", and began to be referred to as \"Boss\", especially after he tightened his hold on power by creating a small executive committee to run the club. Tweed then took steps to increase his income: he used his law firm to extort money, which was then disguised as legal services; he had himself appointed deputy street commissioner\u00a0\u2013 a position with considerable access to city contractors and funding; he bought the New-York Printing Company, which became the city's official printer, and the city's stationery supplier, the Manufacturing Stationers' Company, and had both companies begin to overcharge the city government for their goods and services. Among other legal services he provided, he accepted almost $100,000 from the Erie Railroad in return for favors. He also became one of the largest owners of real estate in the city. He also started to form what became known as the \"Tweed Ring\", by having his friends elected to office: George G. Barnard was elected Recorder of New York City; Peter B. Sweeny was elected New York County District Attorney; and Richard B. Connolly was elected City Comptroller. Other judicial members of the Tweed ring included Albert Cardozo, John McCunn, and John K. Hackett.\nWhen Grand Sachem Isaac Fowler, who had produced the $2,500 to buy off the Republican Voorhis on the Board of Supervisors, was found to have stolen $150,000 in post office receipts, the responsibility for Fowler's arrest was given to Isaiah Rynders, another Tammany operative who was serving as a United States marshal at the time. Rynders made enough ruckus upon entering the hotel where Fowler was staying that Fowler was able to escape to Mexico.\nWith his new position and wealth came a change in style: Tweed began to favor wearing a large diamond in his shirtfront\u00a0\u2013 a habit that Thomas Nast used to great effect in his attacks on Tweed in \"Harper's Weekly\" beginning in 1869\u00a0\u2013 and he bought a brownstone to live in at 41 West 36th Street, then a very fashionable area. He invested his now considerable illegal income in real estate, so that by the late 1860s he ranked among the biggest landowners in New York City.\nTweed was a member of the New York State Senate (4th D.) from 1868 to 1873, sitting in the 91st, 92nd, 93rd and 94th New York State Legislatures, but not taking his seat in the 95th and 96th New York State Legislatures. While serving in the State Senate, he split his time between Albany, New York and New York City. While in Albany, he stayed in a suite of seven rooms in Delevan House. Accompanying him in his rooms were his favorite canaries. Guests are presumed to have included members of the Black Horse Cavalry, thirty state legislators whose votes were up for sale. In the Senate he helped financiers Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk to take control of the Erie Railroad from Cornelius Vanderbilt by arranging for legislation that legitimized fake Erie stock certificates that Gould and Fisk had issued. In return, Tweed received a large block of stock and was made a director of the company.\nCorruption.\nAfter the election of 1869, Tweed took control of the New York City government. His prot\u00e9g\u00e9, John T. Hoffman, the former mayor of the city, won election as governor, and Tweed garnered the support of good government reformers like Peter Cooper and the Union League Club, by proposing a new city charter which returned power to City Hall at the expense of the Republican-inspired state commissions. The new charter passed, thanks in part to $600,000 in bribes Tweed paid to Republicans, and was signed into law by Hoffman in 1870. Mandated new elections allowed Tammany to take over the city's Common Council when they won all fifteen aldermanic contests.\nThe new charter put control of the city's finances in the hands of a Board of Audit, which consisted of Tweed, who was Commissioner of Public Works, Mayor A. Oakey Hall and Comptroller Richard \"Slippery Dick\" Connolly, both Tammany men. Hall also appointed other Tweed associates to high offices\u00a0\u2013 such as Peter B. Sweeny, who took over the Department of Public Parks\u00a0\u2013 providing what became known as the Tweed Ring with even firmer control of the New York City government and enabling them to defraud the taxpayers of many more millions of dollars. In the words of Albert Bigelow Paine, \"their methods were curiously simple and primitive. There were no skilful manipulations of figures, making detection difficult ... Connolly, as Controller, had charge of the books, and declined to show them. With his fellows, he also 'controlled' the courts and most of the bar.\" Crucially, the new city charter allowed the Board of Audit to issue bonds for debt in order to finance opportunistic capital expenditures the city otherwise could not afford. This ability to float debt was enabled by Tweed's guidance and passage of the Adjusted Claims Act in 1868. Contractors working for the city\u00a0\u2013 \"Ring favorites, most of them\u00a0\u2013 were told to multiply the amount of each bill by five, or ten, or a hundred, after which, with Mayor Hall's 'O. K.' and Connolly's endorsement, it was paid ... through a go-between, who cashed the check, settled the original bill and divided the remainder ... between Tweed, Sweeny, Connolly and Hall\".\nFor example, the construction cost of the New York County Courthouse, begun in 1861, grew to nearly $13\u00a0million\u2014about $178\u00a0million in 2017 dollars, and nearly twice the cost of the Alaska Purchase in 1867.\n\"A carpenter was paid $360,751 (roughly $4.9\u00a0million today) for one month's labor in a building with very little woodwork ... a plasterer got $133,187 ($1.82\u00a0million) for two days' work\". Tweed bought a marble quarry in Sheffield, Massachusetts, to provide much of the marble for the courthouse at great profit to himself. After the Tweed Charter to reorganize the city's government was passed in 1870, four commissioners for the construction of the New York County Courthouse were appointed. The commission never held a meeting, though each commissioner received a 20% kickback from the bills for the supplies.\nTweed and his friends also garnered huge profits from the development of the Upper East Side, especially Yorkville and Harlem. They would buy up undeveloped property, then use the resources of the city to improve the area\u00a0\u2013 for instance by installing pipes to bring in water from the Croton Aqueduct\u00a0\u2013 thus increasing the value of the land, after which they sold and took their profits. The focus on the east side also slowed down the development of the west side, the topography of which made it more expensive to improve. The ring also took their usual percentage of padded contracts, as well as raking off money from property taxes. Despite the corruption of Tweed and Tammany Hall, they did accomplish the development of upper Manhattan, though at the cost of tripling the city's bond debt to almost $90\u00a0million.\nDuring the Tweed era, the proposal to build a suspension bridge between New York and Brooklyn, then an independent city, was floated by Brooklyn-boosters, who saw the ferry connections as a bottleneck to Brooklyn's further development. In order to ensure that the Brooklyn Bridge project would go forward, State Senator Henry Cruse Murphy approached Tweed to find out whether New York's aldermen would approve the proposal. Tweed's response was that $60,000 for the aldermen would close the deal, and contractor William C. Kingsley put up the cash, which was delivered in a carpet bag. Tweed and two others from Tammany also received over half the private stock of the Bridge Company, the charter of which specified that only private stockholders had voting rights, so that even though the cities of Brooklyn and Manhattan put up most of the money, they essentially had no control over the project.\nTweed bought a mansion on Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street, and stabled his horses, carriages and sleighs on 40th Street. By 1871, he was a member of the board of directors of not only the Erie Railroad and the Brooklyn Bridge Company, but also the Third Avenue Railway Company and the Harlem Gas Light Company. He was president of the Guardian Savings Banks and he and his confederates set up the Tenth National Bank to better control their fortunes.\nScandal.\nTweed's downfall began in 1871. James Watson, who was a county auditor in Comptroller Dick Connolly's office and who also held and recorded the ring's books, died a week after his head was smashed by a horse in a sleigh accident on January 21, 1871. Although Tweed guarded Watson's estate in the week prior to Watson's death, and although another ring member attempted to destroy Watson's records, a replacement auditor, Matthew O'Rourke, associated with former sheriff James O'Brien provided city accounts to O'Brien. The Orange riot of 1871 in the Summer did not help the ring's popularity. The riot was prompted after Tammany Hall banned a parade of Irish Protestants celebrating a historical victory against Catholicism. The parade was banned because of a riot the previous year in which eight people died when a crowd of Irish Catholic laborers attacked the paraders. Under strong pressure from the newspapers and the Protestant elite of the city, Tammany reversed course, and the march was allowed to proceed, with protection from city policemen and state militia. The result was an even larger riot in which over 60 people were killed and more than 150 injured.\nAlthough Tammany's electoral power base was largely centered in the Irish immigrant population, it also needed the city's elite to acquiesce in its rule, and this was conditional on the machine's ability to control the actions of its people, but the July riot showed that this capability was not nearly as strong as had been supposed.\nTweed had for months been under attack from \"The New York Times\" and Thomas Nast, the cartoonist from \"Harper's Weekly\"\u00a0\u2013 regarding Nast's cartoons, Tweed reportedly said, \"Stop them damned pictures. I don't care so much what the papers say about me. My constituents don't know how to read, but they can't help seeing them damned pictures!\" \u2013 but their campaign had only limited success in gaining traction. They were able to force an examination of the city's books, but the blue-ribbon commission of six businessmen appointed by Mayor A. Oakey Hall, a Tammany man, which included John Jacob Astor III, banker Moses Taylor and others who benefited from Tammany's actions, found that the books had been \"faithfully kept\", letting the air out of the effort to dethrone Tweed.\nThe response to the Orange riot changed everything, and only days afterwards the \"Times\"/Nast campaign began to garner popular support. More important, the \"Times\" started to receive inside information from County Sheriff James O'Brien, whose support for Tweed had fluctuated during Tammany's reign. O'Brien had tried to blackmail Tammany by threatening to expose the ring's embezzlement to the press, and when this failed he provided the evidence he had collected to the \"Times\". Shortly afterward, county auditor Matthew J. O'Rourke supplied additional details to the \"Times\", which was reportedly offered $5\u00a0million to not publish the evidence. The \"Times\" also obtained the accounts of the recently deceased James Watson, who was the Tweed Ring's bookkeeper, and these were published daily, culminating in a special four-page supplement on July 29 headlined \"Gigantic Frauds of the Ring Exposed\". In August, Tweed began to transfer ownership in his real-estate empire and other investments to his family members.\nThe expos\u00e9 provoked an international crisis of confidence in New York City's finances, and, in particular, in its ability to repay its debts. European investors were heavily positioned in the city's bonds and were already nervous about its management\u00a0\u2013 only the reputations of the underwriters were preventing a run on the city's securities. New York's financial and business community knew that if the city's credit were to collapse, it could potentially bring down every bank in the city with it.\nThus, the city's elite met at Cooper Union in September to discuss political reform: but for the first time, the conversation included not only the usual reformers, but also Democratic bigwigs such as Samuel J. Tilden, who had been thrust aside by Tammany. The consensus was that the \"wisest and best citizens\" should take over the governance of the city and attempt to restore investor confidence. The result was the formation of the Executive Committee of Citizens and Taxpayers for Financial Reform of the City (also known as \"the Committee of Seventy\"), which attacked Tammany by cutting off the city's funding. Property owners refused to pay their municipal taxes, and a judge\u00a0\u2013 Tweed's old friend George Barnard\u00a0\u2013 enjoined the city Comptroller from issuing bonds or spending money. Unpaid workers turned against Tweed, marching to City Hall demanding to be paid. Tweed doled out some funds from his own purse\u00a0\u2013 $50,000\u00a0\u2013 but it was not sufficient to end the crisis, and Tammany began to lose its essential base.\nShortly thereafter, the Comptroller resigned, appointing Andrew Haswell Green, an associate of Tilden, as his replacement. Green loosened the purse strings again, allowing city departments not under Tammany control to borrow money to operate. Green and Tilden had the city's records closely examined, and discovered money that went directly from city contractors into Tweed's pocket. The following day, they had Tweed arrested.\nImprisonment, escape, and death.\nTweed was released on $1\u00a0million bail, and Tammany set to work to recover its position through the ballot box. Tweed was re-elected to the state senate in November 1871, due to his personal popularity and largesse in his district, but in general Tammany did not do well, and the members of the Tweed Ring began to flee the jurisdiction, many going overseas. Tweed was re-arrested, forced to resign his city positions, and was replaced as Tammany's leader. Once again, he was released on bail\u00a0\u2013 $8\u00a0million this time\u00a0\u2013 but Tweed's supporters, such as Jay Gould, felt the repercussions of his fall from power.\nTweed's first trial, in January 1873, ended when the jury was unable to agree on a verdict. Tweed's defense counsel included David Dudley Field II and Elihu Root. His retrial in November resulted in convictions on 204 of 220 counts, a fine of $12,750 (the equivalent of $ today) and a prison sentence of 12 years; a higher court, however, reduced Tweed's sentence to one year. After his release from prison, a year spent in the Tombs, New York State filed a civil suit against Tweed, attempting to recover $6\u00a0million in embezzled funds. Unable to put up the $3\u00a0million bail, Tweed was locked up in the Ludlow Street Jail, although he was allowed home visits. During one of these on December 4, 1875, Tweed escaped and fled to Spain, where he worked as a common seaman on a Spanish ship. The U.S. government discovered his whereabouts and arranged for his arrest once he reached the Spanish border; he was recognized from Nast's political cartoons. He was turned over to an American warship, the , which delivered him to authorities in New York City on November 23, 1876, and he was returned to prison.\nDesperate and broken, Tweed now agreed to testify about the inner workings of the Tweed Ring to a special committee set up by the Board of Aldermen, in return for his release, but after he did so, Tilden, now governor of New York, refused to abide by the agreement, and Tweed remained incarcerated. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail on April 12, 1878, from severe pneumonia, and was buried in the Brooklyn Green-Wood Cemetery. Mayor Smith Ely would not allow the flag at City Hall to be flown at half staff.\nEvaluations.\nAccording to Tweed biographer Kenneth D. Ackerman:It's hard not to admire the skill behind Tweed's system\u00a0... The Tweed ring at its height was an engineering marvel, strong and solid, strategically deployed to control key power points: the courts, the legislature, the treasury and the ballot box. Its frauds had a grandeur of scale and an elegance of structure: money-laundering, profit sharing and organization.\nIn depictions of Tweed and the Tammany Hall organization, historians have emphasized the thievery and conspiratorial nature of Boss Tweed, along with lining his own pockets and those of his friends and allies. The theme is that the sins of corruption so violated American standards of political rectitude that they far overshadow Tweed's positive contributions to New York City.\nAlthough he held numerous important public offices and was one of a handful of senior leaders of Tammany Hall, as well as the state legislature and the state Democratic Party, Tweed was never the sole \"boss\" of New York City. He shared control of the city with numerous less famous people, such as the villains depicted in Nast's famous circle of guilt cartoon shown above. Seymour J. Mandelbaum has argued that, apart from the corruption he engaged in, Tweed was a modernizer who prefigured certain elements of the Progressive Era in terms of more efficient city management. Much of the money he siphoned off from the city treasury went to needy constituents who appreciated the free food at Christmas time and remembered it at the next election, and to precinct workers who provided the muscle of his machine. As a legislator he worked to expand and strengthen welfare programs, especially those by private charities, schools, and hospitals. With a base in the Irish Catholic community, he opposed efforts of Protestants to require the reading of the King James Bible in public schools, which was done deliberately to keep out Catholics. He facilitated the founding of the New York Public Library, even though one of its founders, Samuel Tilden, was Tweed's sworn enemy in the Democratic Party.\nTweed recognized that the support of his constituency was necessary for him to remain in power, and as a consequence he used the machinery of the city's government to provide numerous social services, including building more orphanages, almshouses and public baths. Tweed also fought for the New York State Legislature to donate to private charities of all religious denominations, and subsidize Catholic schools and hospitals. From 1869 to 1871, under Tweed's influence, the state of New York spent more on charities than for the entire time period from 1852 to 1868 combined. Tweed also pushed through funding for a teachers college and prohibition of corporal punishment in schools, as well as salary increases for school teachers.\nDuring Tweed's regime, the main business thoroughfare Broadway was widened between 34th Street and 59th Street, land was secured for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the Upper East Side and Upper West Side were developed and provided the necessary infrastructure \u2013 all to the benefit of the purses of the Tweed Ring, but also, ultimately, to the benefit of the people of the city.\nAccording to Leo Hershkowitz in \"Tweed's New York: Another Look\", there is no evidence of any personal financial gain on Tweed's part, despite the implications of Thomas Nast in \"Harper's Weekly\" and the editors of \"The New York Times\", which both had ties to the Republican party. In part, the campaign against Tweed diverted public attention from Republican scandals such as the Whiskey Ring.\nTweed himself wanted no particular recognition of his achievements, such as they were. When it was proposed, in March 1871, when he was at the height of his power, that a statue be erected in his honor, he declared: \"Statues are not erected to living men ... I claim to be a live man, and hope (Divine Providence permitting) to survive in all my vigor, politically and physically, some years to come.\" One of Tweed's unwanted legacies is that he has become \"the archetype of the bloated, rapacious, corrupt city boss\".\nMiddle name.\nTweed never signed his name with anything other than a plain \"M.\", and his middle name is often mistakenly listed as \"Marcy\". His actual middle name was \"Magear\", his mother's maiden name. Tweed's son's name was William Magear Tweed Jr.\nConfusion derived from a Nast cartoon with a picture of Tweed supplemented with a quote from William L. Marcy, the former governor of New York.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1945, Tweed was portrayed by Noah Beery Sr. in the Broadway production of \"Up in Central Park\", a musical comedy with music by Sigmund Romberg. The role was played by Malcolm Lee Beggs for a revival in 1947. In the 1948 film version, Tweed is played by Vincent Price.\nOn the 1963\u20131964 CBS TV series \"The Great Adventure\", which presented one-hour dramatizations of the lives of historical figures, Edward Andrews portrayed Tweed in the episode \"The Man Who Stole New York City\", about the campaign by \"The New York Times\" to bring down Tweed. The episode aired on December 13, 1963.\nIn John Varley's 1977 science-fiction novel, \"The Ophiuchi Hotline\", a crooked politician in a 27th-century human settlement on the Moon assumes the name \"Boss Tweed\" in emulation of the 19th-century politician, and names his lunar headquarters \"Tammany Hall\".\nTweed was played by Philip Bosco in the 1986 TV movie \"Liberty\". According to a review of the film in \"The New York Times\", it was Tweed who made the suggestion to call the Statue of Liberty by that name, instead of its formal name \"Liberty Enlightening the World\", in order to read better in newspaper headlines.\nAndrew O'Hehir of \"The New York Times\" notes that \"Forever\", a 2003 novel by Pete Hamill, and \"Gangs of New York\", a 2002 film, both \"offer a significant supporting role to the legendary Manhattan political godfather Boss Tweed\", among other thematic similarities. In a review of the latter work, Chuck Rudolph praised Jim Broadbent's portrayal of Tweed as \"giving the role a masterfully heartless composure\".\nTweed appears as an antagonist in the novel, \"Assassin's Creed Last Descendants\" where he is the Grand Master of the American Templars during the American Civil War.\nTweed appears in T. J. English's book \"Paddy Whacked\" and the subsequent documentary film, in regards to his connection to Irish mob boss John Morrissey.\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "4689", "revid": "40886678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4689", "title": "Balsall Heath", "text": "Balsall Heath is an inner-city area of Birmingham, West Midlands, England. It has a diverse cultural mix of people and is the location of the Balti Triangle.\nHistory.\nBalsall Heath was agricultural land between Moseley village and the city of Birmingham until the 1850s when expansion along Moseley Road joined the two. The area was originally part of the Worcestershire parish of King's Norton, and was added to the county borough of Birmingham in Warwickshire on 1 October 1891.\nDuring negotiations in the previous year it had been promised a public baths and a free library. In 1895, the library was opened on Moseley Road and, in 1907, Balsall Heath Baths were opened in an adjoining building. \nIn 1900, the city's College of Art was also opened on Moseley Road. By this time the small lake (\"Lady Pool\" on old maps) at the end of Ladypool Road had been filled in to create a park. \nBalsall Heath initially had a reasonably affluent population, which can still be seen in the dilapidated grandeur of some of the larger houses. A railway station on Brighton Road (on the Birmingham to Bristol line) led to further expansion, and the end of the 19th century saw a proliferation of high-density small terraced houses.\nA Muslim community was started in June 1940 when two Yemenis purchased an artisan cottage on Mary Street. With the mosque being located in the area, more Muslim immigrants began to move into private lodgings in Balsall Heath. Today, Balsall Heath has one of the largest Muslim communities in Birmingham. It is also home to diverse communities from across the Commonwealth.\nBy the 1980s, many of Balsall Heath's houses were in a dilapidated condition; some still lacked bathrooms or indoor toilets. The local council considered demolishing these properties but chose to refurbish them as part of an urban renewal scheme. Most of these Victorian terraces still exist and, along with more modern social housing, characterise the area today. The area's traditional 'brick' pavements were replaced at this time by the more modern and conventional paving slabs. \nBalsall Heath's low rents also attracted a bohemian student population. Its proximity to the University of Birmingham, the city centre and the \"trendy\" area of Moseley were all contributing factors. There was little conflict between the students and locals despite their vastly differing lifestyles. However, a knife-incident in 1991 led to an article in \"Redbrick\" warning students not to live in the area.\nIn July 2005, Balsall Heath was hit by a tornado, which devastated many buildings around Church Road and Ladypool Road. Birmingham City Council offered loans to those who would otherwise be unable to repair their properties, and the area has now made a full recovery.\nRed light era.\nStreet prostitution first appeared in Balsall Heath during the 1950s. Property values fell, attracting Birmingham's poorer migrants. By the 1970s, the area was notorious for street robberies and drug dealing. Cheddar Road was the centre of a red-light district worked by 450 women. About half of the 50 houses on this road had prostitutes advertising themselves in the windows, similar to Amsterdam. It was labelled Britain's busiest cul-de-sac. This period of the area's history is depicted in the 1980 film \"Prostitute\".\nIn 1986, an organisation called ANAWIM was formed by the Sisters of Charity to provide outreach support to the prostitutes. \nIn September 1992, a report was published encouraging the formation of a zone of tolerance towards prostitution in Balsall Heath. This was opposed by residents and a local police inspector. In the following year Samo Paull, a woman working as a prostitute, was abducted from Balsall Heath and murdered. \nIn 1994, residents began to organise street patrols forcing the prostitutes and street criminals out of the area. These patrols had the qualified support of the police but were regarded as vigilantes by some. There was an immediate two-thirds reduction in street and window prostitution. By November 1995, they had been almost completely eliminated.\nThe area has enjoyed a slow revival. House prices are now similar to those in other inner-city areas, while the crime rate is among the lowest."}
{"id": "4690", "revid": "3006008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4690", "title": "Bunge &amp; Born", "text": "Bunge &amp; Born was a multinational corporation based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, whose diverse interests included food processing and international trade in grains and oilseeds. It is now known as Bunge Limited.\nHistory.\nBunge &amp; Born was founded in 1884 by Ernesto Bunge, a German Argentine whose uncle, Carl Bunge, had been Consul General in Argentina for both the Netherlands and Prussia, and his brother-in-law, Jorge Born, who had recently arrived from Antwerp. The company superseded the Bunge Company founded in Amsterdam by Johann Bunge, in 1818. Following the purchase of of prime pampas wheat fields, Bunge &amp; Born established \"Centenera\", their first food processing plant, in 1899. They had one of the largest wheat mills in the country built on a Puerto Madero lot in 1902, and with it, established \"Molinos R\u00edo de la Plata\" (later a leader in the local retail foods market).\nThe company started Argentina's first burlap bag manufacturer, following which they successfully lobbied government policy makers for protective tariffs on the then-critical commercial staple. They established a mortgage bank, the \"Banco Hipotecario Franco Argentino\", and a subsidiary in Brazil in 1905, and by 1910, they reportedly controlled 80% of Argentine cereal exports (Argentina was, by then, the world's third-largest grain exporter). They later established paint manufacturer \"Alba\" (1925), chemical and fertilizer maker \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda Qu\u00edmica\", and textile maker \"Grafa\" (1932), among others; by the late 1920s, the company's annual export receipts alone reached US$300 million. The company inaugurated its neo-gothic Buenos Aires headquarters on Leandro Alem Avenue, designed by local architect Pablo Naeff, in 1926.\nBunge &amp; Born's near-monopoly on cereal and flour exports ended with populist President Juan Per\u00f3n's 1946 establishment of the IAPI, a state agricultural purchasing and export agent. The company responded by extending its reach into the country fast-growing retail processed foods market, and though its prominence as the nation's chief exporter was partly restored by Per\u00f3n's 1955 ousting and the IAPI's liquidation, its focus remained domestic over the next three decades. A privately held company, Bunge &amp; Born did not release periodical financial statements, though it did report US$2bn in gross receipts in 1962; by then it had become a leader in commodity futures trading, operating 110 offices worldwide.\nThe Bunge, Born, Hirsch, Engels and De La Tour families remained the company's chief stock-holders, and by extension, leaders in the domestic textile, paint, chemical, fertilizer, and food processing industries. On September 19, 1974, however, the consortium was shaken by the kidnapping of siblings Jorge and Juan Born by the far-left terrorist group, Montoneros. The Born brothers were kept in a known Argentine State Intelligence safehouse for nine months until their June 1975 release, something made possible without public suspicion of outside involvement by the agency's numerous contacts inside the Montoneros (including the leader, Mario Firmenich). Freed for a US$60 million ransom (the largest on record at that time), the ordeal triggered the company headquarters' relocation to S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil, and contributed to the March 1976 coup.\nRetaining their Argentine interests (44 companies, by the 1980s), the families continued to suffer from ongoing disputes, and in 1987, CEO Mario Hirsch died suddenly. The election of Carlos Menem to the Argentine Presidency in May 1989, however, resulted in an agreement between the President-elect and Jorge Born that gave the company partial control over national economic policy. Bunge &amp; Born provided the Menem government with its first two economy ministers, and the combination of large rate increases on public services (around 500%), a simplified exchange rate and a massive, mandatory wage hike led to a sharp economic turnaround between July and November 1989. This foray into government policy making, however, ended in a new currency crisis that December and the failure (compounded by the company's lackluster business performance) resulted in Born's 1991 ouster from the board; he was replaced by Chief Operations Officer Octavio Caraballo.\nBeset by the rift between Jorge Born and his brother, Juan, the prior unity between the shareholders disintegrated as Caraballo struggled to modernize the company. Family frictions intensified when Jorge Born formed a business partnership with one of his former kidnappers, erstwhile Montonero strategist Rodolfo Galimberti.\nBunge International.\nThe company was converted into the Bermuda-registered Bunge International in 1994, retaining the Bunge y Born name only in Argentina. Bunge remained a privately held company of 180 shareholders (including the longtime controlling family interests) and divested itself in 1998 of almost all its retail foods interests in favor of a greater role in international agribusiness and commodity markets; by then the company's gross annual turnover had reached US$13 billion. Bunge ultimately went public on the NYSE in 2001, becoming \"Bunge Limited\"."}
{"id": "4691", "revid": "1012360472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4691", "title": "Big Apple", "text": "\"The Big Apple\" is a nickname for New York City. It was first popularized in the 1920s by John J. Fitz Gerald, a sports writer for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\". Its popularity since the 1970s is due in part to a promotional campaign by the New York tourist authorities.\nOrigin of the name.\nAlthough the history of \"Big Apple \" was once thought a mystery, a clearer picture of the term's history has emerged due to the work of historian Barry Popik, and Gerald Cohen of the Missouri University of Science and Technology. A number of false theories had previously existed, including a claim that the term derived from a woman named Eve who ran a brothel in the city. This was subsequently exposed as a hoax.\nThe earliest known usage of \"big apple\" appears in the book \"The Wayfarer in New York\" (1909), in which Edward S. Martin writes: Kansas is apt to see in New York a greedy city ... It inclines to think that the big apple gets a disproportionate share of the national sap. William Safire considered this the coinage, but because the phrase is not quoted in the text, it's likely that it was used as a metaphor, and not as a nickname for the city.\nHorse racing origin.\n\"The Big Apple\" was popularized as a name for New York City by John J. Fitz Gerald in a number of horse-racing articles for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\" in the 1920s. The earliest of these was a casual reference on 3 May 1921:\nFitz Gerald referred to the \"big apple\" frequently thereafter. He explained his use in a column dated February 18, 1924, under the headline \"Around the Big Apple\":\nFitz Gerald reportedly first heard \"The Big Apple\" used to describe New York's racetracks by two African American stable hands at the New Orleans Fair Grounds. Using racing records, Popik traced that conversation to January 1920.\nIn recognition of Fitz Gerald's role in promulgating \"The Big Apple\" as a nickname for New York City, in 1997 Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani signed legislation designating as \"Big Apple Corner\" the southwest corner of West 54th Street and Broadway, the corner on which John J. Fitz Gerald lived from 1934 to 1963. The Hotel Ameritania also once had a plaque which was installed in 1996, according to Popik, but it was removed during renovations to the building and was lost.\nEvidence can also be found in the \"Chicago Defender\", an African-American newspaper that had a national circulation. Writing for the \"Defender\" on September 16, 1922, \"Ragtime\" Billy Tucker used the name \"big apple\" to refer to New York in a non-horse-racing context:\nTucker had also earlier used \"big apple\" as a reference to Los Angeles. It is possible that he simply used \"big apple\" as a nickname for any large city:\nPopularity.\nBy the late 1920s, New York writers other than Fitz Gerald were starting to use \"Big Apple\", and were using it in contexts other than horse racing. \"The Big Apple\" was a popular song and dance in the 1930s. Jazz musicians in the 1930s also contributed to the use of the phrase to refer to New York City, specifically to the city and Harlem as the jazz capital of the world. Beside the song and the dance, two nightclubs in the city used \"Big Apple\" in their names.\nWalter Winchell and other writers continued to use the term in the 1940s and early 1950s, but by the late 1950s, if it was known at all, it had come to be considered an outdated nickname for New York.\nIn the early 1970s, however, during the city's fiscal crisis, \"People were looking around desperately and some of [them] seized that old phrase the Big Apple to remind people of when New York had been a strong and powerful city and might become that again,\" according to the official Manhattan Borough Historian, Dr. Robert Snyder. It was then that the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau \u2013 now NYC &amp; Company, New York City's official marketing and tourism organization) \u2013 with the help of the Ogilvy &amp; Mather advertising firm, began to promote the city's \"Big Apple\" nickname to tourists, under the leadership of its president, Charles Gillett. The campaign was a success, and the nickname has remained popular since then.\nToday the name is used exclusively to refer to New York City, and is used with regularity by journalists and news headline writers across the English-speaking world."}
{"id": "4692", "revid": "1010173588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4692", "title": "Boston Corbett", "text": "Thomas H. \"Boston\" Corbett (January 29, 1832 \u2013 presumed dead c. September 1, 1894) was a Union Army soldier who shot and killed President Abraham Lincoln's assassin, John Wilkes Booth. Corbett was initially arrested for disobeying orders, but was later released on the orders of Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, who referred to Corbett as \"the patriot\" upon dismissing him. He was largely considered a hero by the media and the public.\nKnown for his devout religious beliefs and eccentric behavior, Corbett drifted around the United States before disappearing \"circa\" 1888. Circumstantial evidence suggests that he died in the Great Hinckley Fire in September 1894, but that remains impossible to substantiate.\nEarly life and education.\nCorbett was born in London and immigrated with his family to New York City in 1840. The Corbetts moved frequently before eventually settling in Troy, New York. As a young man, Corbett began apprenticing as a milliner (also called a \"hatter\"), a profession that he would hold intermittently throughout his life. As a milliner, Corbett was regularly exposed to the fumes of mercury(II) nitrate, then used in the treatment of fur to produce felt used on hats. Excessive exposure to the compound can lead to hallucinations, psychosis and twitching (known as the \"hatter's shakes\"). Historians have theorized that the mental issues Corbett exhibited before and after the Civil War were caused by this exposure.\nFamily and religion.\nAfter working as a milliner in Troy, Corbett returned to New York City. He later married, but his wife and child died in childbirth. Following their deaths, he moved to Boston. Corbett became despondent over the loss of his wife and began drinking heavily. He was unable to hold a job and eventually became homeless. After a night of heavy drinking, he was confronted by a street preacher whose message persuaded him to join the Methodist Episcopal Church. Corbett immediately stopped drinking and became devoutly religious. After being baptized, he subsequently changed his name to Boston, the name of the city where he was converted. He regularly attended meetings at the Fulton and Bromfield Street churches where his enthusiastic behavior earned him the nickname \"The Glory to God man\". In an attempt to imitate Jesus, Corbett began to wear his hair very long (he was forced to cut it upon enlisting in the Union Army).\nIn 1857, Corbett began working at a hat manufacturer's shop on Washington Street in downtown Boston. He was reported to be a proficient milliner, but was known to proselytize frequently and stop work to pray and sing for co-workers who used profanity in his presence. He also began working as a street preacher and would sermonize and distribute religious literature in North Square. Corbett soon earned a reputation around Boston for being a \"local eccentric\" and religious fanatic. On July\u00a016, 1858, Corbett was propositioned by two prostitutes while walking home from a church meeting. He was deeply disturbed by the encounter. Upon returning to his room at a boardinghouse, Corbett began reading in the Gospel of Matthew (\"And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee...and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake\"). In order to avoid sexual temptation and remain holy, he castrated himself with a pair of scissors. He then ate a meal and went to a prayer meeting before seeking medical treatment.\nMilitary career.\nEnlistment in the Union army.\nIn April 1861, early in the American Civil War, Corbett enlisted as a private in Company I of the 12th Regiment New York Militia. Corbett's eccentric behavior quickly got him into trouble. He carried a Bible with him at all times and read passages aloud from it regularly, held unauthorized prayer meetings and argued with his superior officers. Corbett also condemned officers and superiors for what he perceived as violations of God's word. In one instance, he verbally reprimanded Colonel Daniel Butterfield for using profanity and taking the Lord's name in vain. He was sent to the guardhouse for several days but refused to apologize for his insubordination. Due to his continued disruptive behavior and refusal to take orders, Corbett was court-martialed and sentenced to be shot. His sentence was eventually reduced and he was discharged in August 1863.\nCorbett re-enlisted later that month as a private in Company L, 16th New York Cavalry Regiment. On June\u00a024, 1864, he was captured by Confederate Colonel John S. Mosby's men in Culpeper, Virginia and held prisoner at Andersonville prison for five months. While on the way to Andersonville, the following incident happened, told by a fellow prisoner of Corbett's named William Collins:\nAt Macon there were about a thousand prisoners who had arrived ahead of us. The train we were on unloaded our thousand making 2000 in all. We were taken to an old pasture or common near the railroad tracks where a furrow was ploughed around it for a deadline. There was a small stream of water close to the guard line and the prisoners made a rush for it, most of them had no water for many hours, but the guards kept them back. One of the more venturesome than the rest got through the line and attempted to fill his canteen. He was immediately shot in the arm with buckshot by one of the guards. He was pushed back among our men and laid under a tree. The wounded man was suffering greatly and called for water to ease his pain, but none had any in his canteen. Boston Corbett stepped out of the ranks, having been unable to stand silent any longer. He crossed the deadline, filled his canteen in the stream and gave the wounded man a drink. The guards continually threatened him with death, but Corbett ignored them and went about his business. Despite their threats he returned unharmed and rejoined the ranks of prisoners. The cheers of the soldiers at this brave deed could have been heard one mile away, but Corbett seemed to think it was not out of the ordinary. It was the bravest deed that I had seen during the war. We arrived at Andersonville prison the next day.\nCorbett was released in an exchange in November 1864 and was admitted to the Army hospital in Annapolis, Maryland where he was treated for scurvy, malnutrition and exposure. On his return to his company, he was promoted to sergeant. Corbett later testified for the prosecution in the trial of the commandant of Andersonville, Captain Henry Wirz.\nPursuit of John Wilkes Booth.\nOn April 24, 1865, Corbett's regiment was sent to apprehend John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of President Abraham Lincoln, whom Booth fatally shot on April 14, 1865. On April 26, the regiment surrounded Booth and one of his accomplices, David Herold, in a tobacco barn on the Virginia farm of Richard Garrett. Herold surrendered, but Booth refused and cried out, \"I will not be taken alive!\". The barn was set on fire in an attempt to force him out into the open, but Booth remained inside. Corbett was positioned near a large crack in the barn wall.\nShooting Booth.\nIn an 1878 interview, Corbett claimed that he saw Booth aim his carbine, prompting him to shoot Booth with his Colt revolver despite Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton's orders that Booth be captured alive. The bullet struck Booth in the back of the head behind his left ear, passed through his neck, and out into the barn. A low scream of pain like that produced by a sudden throttling came from the assassin, and he pitched headlong to the floor. Corbett and the other soldiers would note a sense of poetic, or cosmic, justice in that Lincoln and Booth were each shot around the same spot of the head. And the damage to Booth was no less severe than that to Lincoln: the bullet had pierced three vertebrae and partially severed his spinal cord, paralyzing him. Their conditions were different as well, as Mary Clemmer Ames summed it up, \"The balls entered the skull of each at nearly the same spot, but the trifling difference made an immeasurable difference in the sufferings of the two. Mr. Lincoln was unconscious of all pain, while his assassin suffered as exquisite agony as if he had been broken on a wheel.\"\nDeath of Booth.\nIn a weak voice, Booth asked for water and Conger and Baker gave it to him. A soldier poured water into his mouth, which he immediately spat out, unable to swallow. The bullet wound prevented him from swallowing any of the liquid. Booth asked them to roll him over and turn him facedown. Conger thought it a bad idea. Then at least turn me on my side, the assassin pleaded. They did, but Conger saw that the move did not relieve Booth's suffering. Baker noticed it, too: \"He seemed to suffer extreme pain whenever he was moved...and would several times repeat, \u2018Kill me.\u2019\" At sunrise, Booth remained in agonizing pain. His pulse weakening as his breathing became more labored and irregular. In agony, unable to move his limbs, he asked a soldier to lift his hands before his face and whispered as he gazed at them, \"Useless ... Useless.\" These were his last words. A few minutes later, Booth began gasping for air as his throat continued to swell, then there was a shiver and a gurgle and his body shuddered, before Booth died from asphyxia. He died two hours after Corbett shot him.\nLt. Colonel Everton Conger initially thought Booth had shot himself. After realizing Booth had been shot by someone else, Conger and Lt. Doherty asked which officer had shot Booth. Corbett stepped forward and admitted he was the shooter. When asked why he had violated orders, Corbett replied, \"Providence directed me\".\nCourt-martial.\nHe was immediately arrested and was accompanied by Lt. Doherty to the War Department in Washington, D.C. to be court-martialed. When questioned by Edwin Stanton about Booth's capture and shooting, both Doherty and Corbett agreed that Corbett had, in fact, disobeyed orders not to shoot. However, Corbett maintained that he believed Booth had intended to shoot his way out of the barn and that he acted in self-defense. He told Stanton, \"...Booth would have killed me if I had not shot first. I think I did right.\" Corbett maintained that he didn't intend to kill Booth, but merely wanted to inflict a disabling wound, but either his aim slipped or Booth moved at the moment Corbett pulled the trigger. Stanton paused and then stated, \"The rebel is dead. The patriot lives; he has spared the country expense, continued excitement and trouble. Discharge the patriot.\" Upon leaving the War Department, Corbett was greeted by a cheering crowd. As he made his way to Mathew Brady's studio to have his official portrait taken, the crowd followed him asking for autographs and requesting that he tell them about shooting Booth. Corbett told the crowd:\nContradictions.\nEyewitnesses to Booth's shooting contradicted Corbett's version of events and expressed doubts that Corbett was responsible for shooting Booth. Officers who were near Corbett at the time claimed that they never saw him fire his gun (Corbett's gun was never inspected and was eventually lost). They claimed that Corbett came forward only after Lt. Colonel Conger asked who had shot Booth. Richard Garrett, the owner of the farm on which Booth was found, and his 12-year-old son Robert also contradicted Corbett's testimony that he acted in self-defense. Both maintained that Booth had never reached for his gun.\nWhile there was some criticism of Corbett's actions, he was largely considered a hero by the public and press. One newspaper editor declared that Corbett would, \"live as one of the World's great avengers.\" For his part in Booth's capture, Corbett received a portion of the $100,000 reward money, amounting to $1,653.84 (). His annual salary as a U.S. sergeant was $204 (). Corbett received offers to purchase the gun he used to shoot Booth. He refused stating, \"That is not mine\u2014it belongs to the Government, and I would not sell it for any price.\" Corbett also declined an offer for one of Booth's pistols as he did not want a reminder of shooting Booth.\nPost-war life.\nAfter his discharge from the army in August 1865, Corbett went back to work as a hatter in Boston and frequently attended the Bromfield Street Church. When the hatting business in Boston slowed, Corbett moved to Danbury, Connecticut to continue his work and also \"preached in the country round about.\" By 1870, he had relocated once again to Camden, New Jersey, where he was known as a \"Methodist lay preacher\". Corbett's inability to hold a job was attributed to his fanatical behavior; he was routinely fired after continuing his habit of stopping work to pray for his co-workers. In an effort to earn money, Corbett capitalized on his role as \"Lincoln's Avenger\". He gave lectures about the shooting of Booth accompanied by illustrated lantern slides at Sunday schools, women's groups and tent meetings. Corbett was never asked back due to his increasingly erratic behavior and incoherent speeches.\nR.B. Hoover, a man who later befriended Corbett, recalled that Corbett believed \"men who were high in authority at Washington at the time of the assassination\" were hounding him. Corbett said the men were angry because he had deprived them of prosecuting and executing John Wilkes Booth themselves. He also believed the same men had gotten him fired from various jobs. Corbett's paranoia was furthered by hate mail he received for killing Booth. He became fearful that \"Booth's Avengers\" or organizations like the \"Secret Order\" were planning to seek revenge upon him and took to carrying a pistol with him at all times. As his paranoia increased, Corbett began brandishing his pistol at friends or strangers he deemed suspicious.\nWhile attending the Soldiers' Reunion of the Blue and Gray in Caldwell, Ohio, in 1875, Corbett got into an argument with several men over the death of John Wilkes Booth. The men questioned if Booth had really been killed at all which enraged Corbett. He then drew his pistol on the men but was removed from the reunion before he could fire it. In 1878, Corbett moved to Concordia, Kansas, where he acquired a plot of land through homesteading upon which he constructed a dugout home. He continued working as a preacher and attended revival meetings frequently.\nIn January 1887, Corbett was elected Assistant Doorkeeper in the Kansas House of Representatives where he frequently had run-ins with the public and elected officials often brandishing his revolver.\nPresumed fate.\nDue to his fame as \"Lincoln's Avenger\", Corbett was appointed assistant doorkeeper of the Kansas House of Representatives in Topeka in January 1887. On February 15, he became convinced that \nofficers of the House were discriminating against him. He jumped to his feet, brandished a revolver and began chasing the officers out of the building. No one was hurt and Corbett was arrested. The following day, a judge declared Corbett insane and sent him to the Topeka Asylum for the Insane. On May 26, 1888, he escaped from the asylum on horseback. He then rode to Neodesha, Kansas, where he briefly stayed with Richard Thatcher, a man he had met while they were prisoners of war. When Corbett left, he told Thatcher he was going to Mexico.\nRather than going to Mexico, Corbett is believed to have settled in a cabin he built in the forests near Hinckley, in Pine County in eastern Minnesota. He is believed to have died in the Great Hinckley Fire on September\u00a01, 1894. Although there is no proof, the name \"Thomas Corbett\" appears on the list of dead and missing.\nLegacy.\nImposters.\nIn the years following Corbett's presumed death, several men came forward claiming to be \"Lincoln's Avenger\". A few years after Corbett was last seen in Neodesha, Kansas, a patent medicine salesman in Enid, Oklahoma filed an application using Corbett's name to receive pension benefits. After an investigation proved that the man was not Boston Corbett, he was sent to prison. In September 1905, a man arrested in Dallas also claimed to be Corbett. He too was proven to be an imposter and was sent to prison for perjury, and then to the Government Hospital for the Insane.\nMemorials.\nIn 1958, Boy Scout Troop 31, of Concordia, Kansas, built a roadside monument to Corbett located on Key Road. A small sign was also placed to mark the dug hole where Corbett had lived for a time."}
{"id": "4693", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4693", "title": "Berber languages", "text": "The Berber languages, also known as the Amazigh languages (Berber name: , ; Neo-Tifinagh: \u2d5c\u2d30\u2d4e\u2d30\u2d63\u2d49\u2d56\u2d5c, Tuareg Tifinagh: \u2d5c\u2d4e\u2d63\u2d57\u2d5c, , ), are a branch of the Afroasiatic language family. They comprise a group of closely related languages spoken by the Berbers, who are indigenous to North Africa. The languages were traditionally written with the ancient Libyco-Berber script, which now exists in the form of Tifinagh.\nBerber is spoken by large populations of Morocco, Algeria and Libya, by smaller populations of Tunisia, northern Mali, western and northern Niger, northern Burkina Faso and Mauritania and in the Siwa Oasis of Egypt. Large Berber-speaking migrant communities, today numbering about 4 million, have been living in Western Europe, spanning over three generations, since the 1950s. The number of Berber people is much higher than the number of Berber speakers.\nAround 95% of the Berber-speaking population speak one of seven major varieties of Berber, each with at least 2 million speakers. They are, in order of number of speakers: Shilha (\"Tacl\u1e25it\"), Kabyle (\"Taqbaylit\"), Central Atlas Tamazight (\"Tamazi\u0263t\"), Riffian (\"Tarifit\"), Shawiya (\"Tacawit\") and Tuareg (\"Tamaceq/Tamajeq/Tamaheq\"). The now extinct Guanche language spoken on the Canary Islands by the Guanches, as well as possibly the languages of the ancient C-Group culture in today's southern Egypt and northern Sudan, are believed to have belonged to the Berber branch of the Afroasiatic family.\nThe Berber languages and dialects have had a written tradition, on and off, for about 2,500 years, although the tradition has been frequently disrupted by cultural shifts and invasions. They were first written in the Libyco-Berber abjad, which is still used today by the Tuareg in the form of Tifinagh. The oldest dated inscription is from the 3rd century BCE. Later, between about 1000 CE and 1500 CE, they were written in the Arabic script, and since the 20th century they have been written in the Berber Latin alphabet, especially among the Kabyle and Riffian communities of Morocco and Algeria. The Berber Latin alphabet was also used by most European and Berber linguists during the 19th and 20th centuries.\nA modernised form of the Tifinagh alphabet, called Neo-Tifinagh, was adopted in Morocco in 2003 for writing Berber, but many Moroccan Berber publications still use the Berber Latin alphabet. Algerians mostly use the Berber Latin alphabet in Berber-language education at public schools, while Tifinagh is mostly used for artistic symbolism. Mali and Niger recognise a Tuareg Berber Latin alphabet customised to the Tuareg phonological system. However, traditional Tifinagh is still used in those countries.\nThere is a cultural and political movement among speakers of the closely related varieties of Northern Berber to promote and unify them under a written standard language called \"Tamazi\u0263t\" (or \"Tamazight\"). The name \"Tamazi\u0263t\" is the current native name of the Berber language in the Moroccan Middle Atlas and Rif regions and the Libyan Zuwarah region. In other Berber-speaking areas, this name was lost. There is historical evidence from medieval Berber manuscripts that all indigenous North Africans from Libya to Morocco have at some point called their language \"Tamazi\u0263t\". The name \"Tamazi\u0263t\" is currently being used increasingly by educated Berbers to refer to the written Berber language, and even to Berber as a whole, including Tuareg.\nIn 2001, Berber became a constitutional national language of Algeria, and in 2011 Berber became a constitutionally official language of Morocco. In 2016, Berber became a constitutionally official language of Algeria alongside Arabic.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Berber\" has been used in Europe since at least the 17th century and is still used today. It was borrowed from Latin \"barbari\". The Latin word is also found in the Arabic designation for these populations, \u0627\u0644\u0628\u0631\u0628\u0631 (\"al-Barbar\"); see Names of the Berber people.\nEtymologically, the Berber root \"M-Z-\u0194\" \u2d4e-\u2d63-\u2d56 (\"Mazigh\") (singular noun: \"Amazigh\", feminine: \"Tamazight\") means \"free man\", \"noble man\", or \"defender\". The feminine \"Tamazight\" traditionally referred specifically to the Riffian and Central Atlas Tamazight languages. Many Berber linguists prefer to consider the term \"Tamazight\" as a pure Berber word to be used only in Berber text while using the European word \"Berber/\"Berbero\"/\"Berb\u00e8re\"\" in European texts to follow the traditions of European writings about the Berbers. European languages distinguish between the words \"Berber\" and \"barbarian\", while Arabic has the same word \"al-Barbari\" for both meanings.\nSome other Berber writers, especially in Morocco, prefer to refer to Berber with \"Amazigh\" when writing about it in French or English.\nTraditionally, the term \"Tamazight\" (in various forms: \"Thamazighth\", \"Tamasheq\", \"Tamajaq\", \"Tamahaq\") was used by many Berber groups to refer to the language they spoke, including the Middle Atlas, the Riffians, the Sened in Tunisia and the Tuareg. However, other terms were used by other groups; for instance, some Berber populations of Algeria called their language \"Taznatit\" (Zenati) or \"Shelha\", while the Kabyles called theirs \"Taqbaylit\", and the inhabitants of the Siwa Oasis called their language \"Siwi\". In Tunisia, the local Amazigh language is usually referred to as \"Shelha\", a term which has been observed in Morocco as well.\nOne group, the Linguasphere Observatory, has attempted to introduce the neologism \"Tamazic languages\" to refer to the Berber languages.\nOrigin.\nBerber is a branch of the Afroasiatic language family. Since modern Berber languages are relatively homogeneous, the date of the Proto-Berber language from which the modern group is derived was probably comparatively recent, comparable to the age of the Germanic or Romance subfamilies. In contrast, the split of the group from the other Afroasiatic sub-phyla is much earlier, and is therefore sometimes associated with the local Mesolithic Capsian culture. A number of extinct populations are believed to have spoken Afroasiatic languages of the Berber branch. According to Peter Behrens and Marianne Bechaus-Gerst, linguistic evidence suggests that the peoples of the C-Group culture in present-day southern Egypt and northern Sudan spoke Berber languages. The Nilo-Saharan Nobiin language today contains a number of key pastoralism-related loanwords that are of Berber origin, including the terms for sheep and water/Nile. This in turn suggests that the C-Group population\u2014which, along with the Kerma culture, inhabited the Nile valley immediately before the arrival of the first Nubian speakers\u2014spoke Afro-Asiatic languages.\nRoger Blench has suggested that Proto-Berber speakers had spread from the Nile River valley to North Africa 4,000-5,000 years ago due to the spread of pastoralism, and experienced intense language leveling about 2,000 years ago. Hence, although Berber had split off from Afroasiatic several thousand years ago, Proto-Berber itself can only be reconstructed to a period as late as 200 A.D. Blench noted that Berber is considerably different from other Afroasiatic branches, but modern-day Berber languages display low internal diversity. The presence of Punic borrowings in Proto-Berber points to the diversification of modern Berber language varieties subsequent to the fall of Carthage in 146 B.C.; only Zenaga lacks Punic loanwords. Additionally, Latin loanwords in Proto-Berber point to the breakup of Proto-Berber between 1 and 200 A.D. During this time period, Roman innovations including the ox-plough, camel, and orchard management were adopted by Berber communities along the \"limes\", or borders of the Roman Empire, as evidenced by the frequency of Latin loanwords from this period in these semantic domains. This resulted in a new trading culture involving the use of a lingua franca which became Proto-Berber.\nOrthography.\nVarious orthographies have been used to transcribe the Berber languages. In antiquity, the Libyco-Berber script (Tifinagh) was utilised to write the Numidian language, also called Old Libyan. Early uses of the script have been found on rock art and in various sepulchres. Among these are the 1,500-year-old monumental tomb of the Tuareg matriarch Tin Hinan, where vestiges of a Tifinagh inscription have been found on one of its walls.\nFollowing the spread of Islam, some Berber scholars also utilised the Arabic script. There are now three writing systems in use for Berber languages: Tifinagh, the Arabic script, and the Berber Latin alphabet.\nStatus.\nAfter independence, all the Maghreb countries to varying degrees pursued a policy of Arabisation, aimed partly at displacing French from its colonial position as the dominant language of education and literacy. Under this policy the use of the Amazigh/Berber languages was suppressed or even banned. This state of affairs has been contested by Berbers in Morocco and Algeria\u2014especially Kabylie\u2014and was addressed in both countries by affording the language official status and introducing it in some schools.\nThe 2011 constitution of Morocco makes \"Amazigh\" an official language alongside Arabic. Morocco is a country with several competing linguistically different languages, including French, Modern Standard Arabic, Moroccan Arabic and Amazigh. As the higher status of Modern Standard Arabic grew, so did the relation between the male population and the language, as well as the female population and the lower status language Amazigh. Women became the main carriers of the Amazigh language as the lower-status language in the country. On 17 June 2011 King Mohammed VI announced in a speech of new constitutional reform that \"Tamazight\" became an official language of Morocco alongside Arabic and will be used in all the administrations in the future. On 30 April 2012 Fatima Chahou, alias \"Tabaamrant\", member of the Moroccan House of Representatives and former singer, became the first person to ask questions and discuss the minister's answer in Tamazight inside the Parliament of Morocco.\nAlgeria recognized Berber as a \"national language\" in 2002, though not as an official one. However, on 7 February 2016 the Algerian parliament recognised Berber languages as having official status along with Arabic.\nAlthough regional councils in Libya's Nafusa Mountains affiliated with the National Transitional Council reportedly use the Berber language of Nafusi and have called for it to be granted co-official status with Arabic in a prospective new constitution, it does not have official status in Libya as in Morocco and Algeria. As areas of Libya south and west of Tripoli such as the Nafusa Mountains were taken from the control of Gaddafi government forces in early summer 2011, Berber workshops and exhibitions sprang up to share and spread the Tamazight culture and language.\nIn Mali and Niger, there are a few schools that teach partially in Tuareg languages.\nPhonology.\nAlthough the sound system of the different Berber languages displays basic similarities, the reconstruction of the Proto-Berber sound inventory is made difficult by sound changes that are hard to retrace and a downright bewildering diversity of allophones. One characteristic of the Berber languages, as well as of other Afroasiatic languages, is the presence of pharyngealised consonants. The existence of phonemic gemination, accompanied by fortis articulation, is typically Afroasiatic, too. However, some caution is advised in making such parallels, since the influence of Arabic on Berber must not be underestimated. Thus, the phonemes //, and , three typically Afroasiatic consonants, were borrowed from Arabic and can't be reconstructed for Proto-Berber. The following consonant phonemes are postulated for Proto-Berber by Maarten Kossmann (in Kossmann's transcription):\nMost consonant phonemes could also occur as geminates, and the place and manner of ariculation of the geminate allophone partially diverged. For example, \u2018\u2019qq\u2019\u2019 was the geminated version of \"\u03b3\". Most northern Berber languages have the four vowels \"a\", \"i\", \"u\" and \"\u0259\", but the last one has partially subphonemic status, since it is predictable based on the syllable structure in certain languages. Vowel length and stress are generally not phonemic there. Tuareg and Ghadames, however, have both the long vowels \"a\", \"i\", \"u\", \"e\", \"o\" and the short vowels \"\u0259\" and \"\u0103\" (also transcribed as \"\u00e4\"/\"\u00e6\"). For Proto-Berber, the short vowels /a/, /i/, /u/ and the long vowels /aa/, /ii/, /uu/, /ee/ are reconstructed, whereas /oo/ probably doesn\u2019t go back to the protolanguages. Of syllable structures, Tuareg permits almost only V, VC, CV, CVC, but many northern dialects may have more complex consonant clusters as well. The accent is so far underresearched, as the only detailed analysis is the one offered by Heath 2005 for Tuareg.\nMorphology.\nThe morphology of Berber is fusional, which is reflected especially in the frequent use of apophony. The base is the \"root\", which consists of a sequence of mostly three, less frequently one, two or four consonants. It contains exclusively lexical information, whereas grammatical information is provided to a significant degree by their vocalisation.\nNominal morphology.\nThe Berber noun distinguishes a masculine and a feminine grammatical gender and the grammatical numbers singular and plural. Similarly to the case system of other languages, the Berber noun has two so-called statuses: \"Status absolutus\" and \"Status annexus\". These are sometimes also called 'accusative case' (or 'absolutive case') and 'nominative case' respectively. Number, gender and status are marked in most nouns by prefixes, which have the following forms in Kabyle:\nStatus absolutus is used as a citation form and extracted topic, as well as a direct object, somewhat similarly to the absolutive case of other languages. Status annexus is used as the subject of a verbal clause and as the object of a preposition (for more information see the section on syntax). This type of system is sometimes also referred to as a marked nominative system. It is present in most Berber languages, although some peripheral varieties (Eastern Berber, Western Berber, some Zenati languages) have recently lost the nominative and thereby the status distinction. Attributive relations between noun phrases are expressed with the preposition \u2018\u2019n\u2019\u2019 (Kabyle:) \"afus n w\u0259-rgaz\" \u201cthe hand of the man \u201c. \"N\" is often used with personal pronouns as well: \"akal-n-s\u0259n\" \u201cyour land\u201c.\nThe feminine can be additionally marked by a suffix \"\u2019t\": Shilha \"a-\u0263yul\" \u201cdonkey\u201c \u2013 \"ta-\u0263yul-t\" \u201cshe-donkey\u201c. Plural forms have additional possibilities of expression. Besides the suffix -\"\u0103n\"/-\"\u0259n\" (Kabyle \"a-rgaz\" \u201cman\u201c \u2013 \"i-rgaz-\u0259n\" \u201cmen\u201c), apophony plays a role as well. The last vowel of a word is changed to \"a\", the first one sometimes to \"u\" (Kabyle \"a-\u0263\u0263ul\" \u201cdonkey\u201c (singular) \u2013 \"i-\u0263\u0263al\" \u201cdonkey\u201c (Plural)).\nPronominal morphology.\nThe personal pronouns of Berber can be divided into two main groups: free forms and clitics, the latter being further classified according to their syntactic function. The following example forms are taken from Tahaggart, a dialect of Tuareg. Especially the plural of the absolutive pronouns can be very different in the other languages:\nAbsolutive pronouns are used emphatically and occur especially clause-intitially. The object pronouns appear as clitics in verbal complexes (see below). Besides objects (e.g. Kabyle: \"iu\u0263a-t\" \"he brought him\"), they can express the subjects of existential predicates (Kabyle: \"hat-t\" \"he is here\") and of some predicative adjectives like 'be good' and 'be bad' (Kabyle: \"d ir-it w\u0259\u0263ru-agi\", \"this bread is bad\"). This, along with the use of nouns in the absolutive status in the same constructions (Tamazight: \"hak argaz\" \"here is the man\"), has been described by some linguists as an element of Split-S alignment and is found in all Berber languages except for the isolated Eastern Berber. The \u201cprepositional\u201c pronouns are suffixed to prepositions as their objects: \"\u0263ur-i\" \u201cwith me\u201c. They can occur with certain restrictions as suffixed possessive pronouns, for example Tuareg \"ma-s\" \u201chis/her mother\u201c, Kabyle \"a\u1e2b\u1e2bam-is\" \u201chis/her house\u201c. However, they are mostly connected \u2013 just like nouns \u2013 by means of the preposition \"n\", cf. Kabyle \"akal-n-s\u0259n\" \u201ctheir land\u201c.\nVerbal morphology.\nStem formation.\nFrom the verbal root, which consists mostly of two or three consonants, different stems can be derived, on the one hand, for the purposes of conjugation, and on the other for derivation. Most Berber languages have four stems, which express different aspects:\nIn different dialects of Tuareg, there are more stems, whose number varies between the dialects. The following two stems are present in all forms of Tuareg:\nThe stems are formed mostly by apophony only, as shown by the following examples from Shawiya:\nIn certain verbs, vowel alternation occurs within the same aspect: uf\"i\"-\u0263 \u201cI found\u201c beside y-uf\"a\" \u201che found\u201c. Apart from that, the Berber languages have a system of verbal derivation inherited from the Proto-Afroasiatic, mostly operating with affixes (examples from Tuareg):\nConjugation.\nThe conjugation of the verb takes place principally via personal prefixes, partly supplemented by suffixes. The personal affixes are identical for all verb stems - the aspects are distinguished exclusively by the verb stem. The conjugation of the aorist stem of \"\u0259kk\u0259s\" \u201cremove\u201c in Tuareg is as follows:\nIn Kabyle and Tuareg, the perfect of verbs that express a quality is conjugated with suffixes:\nBy means of pre- or postverbal clitics, more temporal or modal differences can be expressed (examples from Shilha):\nThe imperative corresponds in singular to the verbal stem of the aorist and therefore functions as the citation form of the verb: \"\u0259kk\u0259s\" \u201cremove\u201c (Tuareg). Besides, an imperative of the intensive stem can be formed. In the plural, the imperative contains an affix, which agrees with the gender of the addressee: \"\u0259kk\u0259s-\u0103t\" \u201cremove\u201c (masculine), \"\u0259kk\u0259s-m\u0103t\" \u201cremove\u201c (feminine). Active participles can be formed from several aspect stems and partly inflect in number and gender. This is mostly achieved as the conjugational form of the corresponding of the third person is provided with suffixes; in Tuareg, additional apophonic markers occur. The participles are used in relative clauses, whose subject is identical to the external antecedent: Kabyle \"ik\u0161\u0259m w\u0259rgaz\" \u201cthe man has entered\u201c (normal verb clause) &gt; \"argaz ik\u0161\u0259m-\u0259n\" \u201cthe man that has entered\u201c (relative clause).\nDeverbal nouns.\nDeverbal nouns can be formed by the superimposition of a series vowel on the consonant root, as shown by the following examples from Tuareg:\nPrefixes can also participate in the formation of deverbal nouns. The prefix \"am-\", \"em-\" occurs very often with that function:\nNumerals.\nModern northern Berber languages use mostly numerals borrowed from Arabic, whereas the originally Berber forms are being replaced. In Shilha, they are as follows:\nThey agree in gender with their antecedent; the feminine forms are derived with the suffix -\"t\": \"ya-t\" \u201cone (fem.)\u201c, sn-at \u201ctwo (fem.)\u201c, smmus-t \u201cfive (fem.)\u201c. There are deviations from that system in different Berber languages; the most important one is the system based on the numeral \u201cfive\u201c of e.g. Nafusi: \"uf\u0259s\" \u201chand; five\u201c, \"uf\u0259s d s\u0259n\" \u201ca hand and two\u201c = \u201cseven\u201c, \"okkos n if\u0259ss\u0259n\" \u201cfour hands\u201c = \u201ctwenty\u201c.\nSyntax.\nVerbal clause.\nWord order.\nClauses whose predicate is a finite verb form usually have the word order Verb \u2013 Subject \u2013 Object (VSO):\nAll constituents besides the predicate can be placed in the beginning of the sentence as topics; in such cases, they are represented in the sentence through resumptive pronouns. In thematised position, nouns are in status absolutus and personal pronouns are in the absolutive form:\nVerbal clitics.\nBefore or after the conjugated verb, a chain of several clitics can occur. The following morphemes can occur in it:\nThe directional morphemes \"d\" and \"n\" represent a special feature of Berber. Whereas\n\"d\" expresses proximity or direction towards the speaker (ventive), \"n\" stands for distance or movement away from the speaker.\nExamples of verbal complexes from Tuareg:\nNominal sentence.\nNoun and prepositional phrases can form the predicate of a clause in the Berber languages, e.g. (Tamazight) \"ism-ns Muha\" \u201chis name is Muha\u201c, (Kabyle) \"\u0263ur-i lbhaim\" \u201cwith me is livestock\u201c = \u201cI have livestock\u201c. In certain dialects, however, the use of the copula \"d\" is obligatory: Kabyle \"ntta d aqbaili.\" \u201cHe is a Kabyle\u201c. In nominal sentences, the subject, too, is in status absolutus.\nLexicon.\nAbove all in the area of basic lexicon, the Berber languages are very similar. However, especially the household-related vocabulary in sedentary tribes is different from the one found in nomadic ones: whereas Tahaggart has only two or three designations for species of palm tree, other languages may have as many as 200 similar words. In contrast, Tahaggart has a rich vocabulary for the description of camels. Above all the northern Berber languages have replaced a great part of the inherited vocabulary with Arabic loans. On the one hand, the words and expressions connected to Islam were borrowed, e.g. Shilha \"bismillah\" \u201cin the name of Allah\u201c &lt; Classical Arabic \"bi-smi-ll\u0101hi\", Tuareg \"ta-mejj\u012bda\" \u201cmosque\u201c (Arabic \"mas\u01e7id\"); on the other, Berber adopted cultural concepts such as Kabyle \"ssuq\" \u201cmarket\u201c from Arabic \"as-s\u016bq\", \"tamdint\" \u201ctown\u201c &lt; Arabisch \"mad\u012bna\". Even expressions such as the Arabic greeting \"as-sal\u0101mu \u02bfalaikum\" \u201cPeace be upon you!\u201c were adopted (Tuareg \"sal\u0101mu \u0263l\u012bkum\"). The Berber languages often have original Berber designations besides the Arabic loans; for instance, both the inherited word \"ataram\" and the loan \"l\u0263\u0259rb\" (Arabic \"al-\u0121arb\") coexist in Kabyle. In more recent times, European languages have also had some influence on Berber, so that words such as \u201cinternet\u201c were adopted in it (Kabyle \"int\u0259rn\u0259t\").\nPopulation.\nThe exact population of Berber speakers is hard to ascertain, since most North African countries do not record language data in their censuses. Ethnologue provides a useful academic starting point; however, its bibliographic references are very inadequate, and it rates its own accuracy at only B-C for the area. Early colonial censuses may provide better documented figures for some countries; however, these are also very much out of date.\nA survey included in the official Moroccan census of 2004 and published by several Moroccan newspapers gave the following figures: 34 percent of people in rural regions spoke a Berber language and 21 percent in urban zones did; the national average would be 28.4 percent or 8.52 million. It is possible, however, that the survey asked for the language \"used in daily life\", which would result in figures lower than those of native speakers, as the language is not recognised for official purposes and many Berbers who live in a Darija-Arabic-speaking area cannot use Berber as a working language in some work environments like schools and administration; also, the use of Berber as a communication language in government institutions was usually frowned upon or even ridiculed as \"peasant speech\" until recent times which may have affected the results of the survey.\nAdding up the population (according to the official census of 2004) of the Berber-speaking regions as shown on a 1973 map from the CIA results in at least 10 million speakers, not counting the numerous Berber population which lives outside these regions in the bigger cities.\nMoroccan linguist Mohamed Chafik claims that 80 percent of Moroccans are Berbers. It is not clear, however, whether he means \"speakers of Berber languages\" or \"people of Berber descent\". \nThe division of Moroccan Berber languages into three groups, as used by Ethnologue, is common in linguistic publications, but is significantly complicated by the presence of local differences: Shilha is subdivided into Shilha of the Draa River valley, Tasusit (the language of the Souss) and several other mountain languages. Moreover, linguistic boundaries are blurred, such that certain languages cannot accurately be described as either Central Morocco Tamazight (spoken in the central and eastern Atlas area) or Shilha.\nOther Berber languages spoken in Algeria include: the Tamazight of Blida, the languages of the Beni Snouss and Beni Boussaid villages in the province of Tlemcen, the Matmata Berber spoken in the Ouarsenis region, the Mozabite language spoken in the region of the province of Mzab and the language of the Ouargla oasis.\nThus, the total number of speakers of Berber languages in the Maghreb proper appears to lie anywhere between 16 and 25 million, depending on which estimate is accepted; if we take Basset's estimate, it could be as high as 30 million. The vast majority are concentrated in Morocco and Algeria. The Tuareg of the Sahel adds another million or so to the total.\nSubclassification.\nA listing of the other Berber languages is complicated by their closeness; there is little distinction between language and dialect. The primary difficulty of subclassification, however, lies in the eastern Berber languages, where there is little agreement. Otherwise there is consensus on the outlines of the family:\nThe various classifications differ primarily in what they consider to be Eastern Berber, and in how many varieties they recognise as distinct languages.\nThere is so little data available on Guanche that any classification is necessarily uncertain; however, it is almost universally acknowledged as Afro-Asiatic on the basis of the surviving glosses, and widely suspected to be Berber. Much the same can be said of the language, sometimes called \"Numidian\", used in the Libyan or Libyco-Berber inscriptions around the turn of the Common Era, whose alphabet is the ancestor of Tifinagh.\nKossmann (1999).\nMaarten Kossmann (1999) describes Berber as two dialect continua,\nplus a few peripheral languages, spoken in isolated pockets largely surrounded by Arabic, that fall outside these continua, namely\nWithin Northern Berber, however, he recognises a break in the continuum between Zenati and their non-Zenati neighbours; and in the east, he recognises a division between Ghadam\u00e8s and Awjila on the one hand and Sokna (Fuqaha, Libya), Siwa and Djebel Nefusa on the other. The implied tree is:\n\"Ethnologue\".\nEthnologue, mostly following Aikhenvald and Militarev (1991), treats the eastern varieties differently:\nBlench (2006).\nBlench (ms, 2006) has the following classification:\nand within Berber,\nInfluence on other languages.\nThe Berber languages have influenced Maghrebi Arabic languages, such as Moroccan, Algerian, Libyan and Tunisian Arabic. Their influence is also seen in some languages in West Africa. F. W. H. Migeod pointed to strong resemblances between Berber and Hausa in such words and phrases as these: Berber: obanis; Hausa \"obansa\" (his father); Berber: a bat; Hausa \"ya bata\" (he was lost); Berber: eghare; Hausa \"ya kirra\" (he called). In addition he notes that the genitive in both languages is formed with n = \"of\".\nExtinct languages.\nA number of extinct populations are believed to have spoken Afro-Asiatic languages of the Berber branch. According to Peter Behrens (1981) and Marianne Bechaus-Gerst (2000), linguistic evidence suggests that the peoples of the C-Group culture in present-day southern Egypt and northern Sudan spoke Berber languages. The Nilo-Saharan Nobiin language today contains a number of key pastoralism related loanwords that are of Berber origin, including the terms for sheep and water/Nile. This in turn suggests that the C-Group population\u2014which, along with the Kerma culture, inhabited the Nile valley immediately before the arrival of the first Nubian speakers\u2014spoke Afro-Asiatic languages.\nAdditionally, historical linguistics indicate that the Guanche language, which was spoken on the Canary Islands by the ancient Guanches, likely belonged to the Berber branch of the Afro-Asiatic family."}
{"id": "4695", "revid": "39203244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4695", "title": "Bankruptcy", "text": "Bankruptcy is a legal process through which people or other entities who cannot repay debts to creditors may seek relief from some or all of their debts. In most jurisdictions, bankruptcy is imposed by a court order, often initiated by the debtor.\nBankrupt is not the only legal status that an insolvent person may have, and the term \"bankruptcy\" is therefore not a synonym for insolvency.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"bankruptcy\" is derived from Italian \"banca rotta\", literally meaning \"broken bench\" but more idiomatically \"broken bank\", since bankers traditionally dealt from wooden benches. A folk etymology alleges that Italian bankers' benches were smashed if they defaulted on payment, but this is often dismissed as a legend.\nHistory.\nIn Ancient Greece, bankruptcy did not exist. If a man owed and he could not pay, he and his wife, children or servants were forced into \"debt slavery\", until the creditor recouped losses through their physical labour. Many city-states in ancient Greece limited debt slavery to a period of five years; debt slaves had protection of life and limb, which regular slaves did not enjoy. However, servants of the debtor could be retained beyond that deadline by the creditor and were often forced to serve their new lord for a lifetime, usually under significantly harsher conditions. An exception to this rule was Athens, which by the laws of Solon forbade enslavement for debt; as a consequence, most Athenian slaves were foreigners (Greek or otherwise).\nThe Statute of Bankrupts of 1542 was the first statute under English law dealing with bankruptcy or insolvency. Bankruptcy is also documented in East Asia. According to al-Maqrizi, the Yassa of Genghis Khan contained a provision that mandated the death penalty for anyone who became bankrupt three times.\nA failure of a nation to meet bond repayments has been seen on many occasions. In a similar way, Philip II of Spain had to declare four state bankruptcies in 1557, 1560, 1575 and 1596. According to Kenneth S. Rogoff, \"Although the development of international capital markets was quite limited prior to 1800, we nevertheless catalog the various defaults of France, Portugal, Prussia, Spain, and the early Italian city-states. At the edge of Europe, Egypt, Russia, and Turkey have histories of chronic default as well.\"\nModern law and debt restructuring.\nThe principal focus of modern insolvency legislation and business debt restructuring practices no longer rests on the elimination of insolvent entities, but on the remodeling of the financial and organizational structure of debtors experiencing financial distress so as to permit the rehabilitation and continuation of the business.\nFor private households, some argue that it is insufficient to merely dismiss debts after a certain period . It is important to assess the underlying problems and to minimize the risk of financial distress to re-occur. It has been stressed that debt advice, a supervised rehabilitation period, financial education and social help to find sources of income and to improve the management of household expenditures must be equally provided during this period of rehabilitation (Refiner \"et al.\", 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). In most EU Member States, debt discharge is conditioned by a partial payment obligation and by a number of requirements concerning the debtor's behavior. In the United States (US), discharge is conditioned to a lesser extent. The spectrum is broad in the EU, with the UK coming closest to the US system (Reifner et al., 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). The Other Member States do not provide the option of a debt discharge. Spain, for example, passed a bankruptcy law (\"ley concurs\") in 2003 which provides for debt settlement plans that can result in a reduction of the debt (maximally half of the amount) or an extension of the payment period of maximally five years (Gerhardt, 2009), but it does not foresee debt discharge.\nIn the US, it is very difficult to discharge federal or federally guaranteed student loan debt by filing bankruptcy. Unlike most other debts, those student loans may be discharged only if the person seeking discharge establishes specific grounds for discharge under the \"Brunner\" test, under which the court evaluates three factors:\nEven if a debtor proves all three elements, a court may permit only a partial discharge of the student loan. Student loan borrowers may benefit from restructuring their payments through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan, but few qualify for discharge of part or all of their student loan debt.\nFraud.\nBankruptcy fraud is a white-collar crime. While difficult to generalize across jurisdictions, common criminal acts under bankruptcy statutes typically involve concealment of assets, concealment or destruction of documents, conflicts of interest, fraudulent claims, false statements or declarations, and fee fixing or redistribution arrangements. Falsifications on bankruptcy forms often constitute perjury. Multiple filings are not in and of themselves criminal, but they may violate provisions of bankruptcy law. In the U.S., bankruptcy fraud statutes are particularly focused on the mental state of particular actions. Bankruptcy fraud is a federal crime in the United States.\nBankruptcy fraud should be distinguished from \"strategic bankruptcy\", which is not a criminal act since it creates a real (not a fake) bankruptcy state. However, it may still work against the filer.\nAll assets must be disclosed in bankruptcy schedules whether or not the debtor believes the asset has a net value. This is because once a bankruptcy petition is filed, it is for the creditors, not the debtor, to decide whether a particular asset has value. The future ramifications of omitting assets from schedules can be quite serious for the offending debtor. In the United States, a closed bankruptcy may be reopened by motion of a creditor or the U.S. trustee if a debtor attempts to later assert ownership of such an \"unscheduled asset\" after being discharged of all debt in the bankruptcy. The trustee may then seize the asset and liquidate it for the benefit of the (formerly discharged) creditors. Whether or not a concealment of such an asset should also be considered for prosecution as fraud or perjury would then be at the discretion of the judge or U.S. Trustee.\nBy country.\nIn some countries, such as the United Kingdom, bankruptcy is limited to individuals; other forms of insolvency proceedings (such as liquidation and administration) are applied to companies. In the United States, \"bankruptcy\" is applied more broadly to formal insolvency proceedings. In some countries, such as in Finland bankruptcy is limited only to companies and individuals who are insolvent are condemned to de facto indentured servitude or minimum social benefits until their debts are paid in full, with accrued interest except when the court decides to show rare clemency by accepting a debtors application for debt restructuring, in which case an individual may have the amount of remaining debt reduced or be released from the debt. In France, the cognate French word \"banqueroute\" is used solely for cases of fraudulent bankruptcy, whereas the term \"faillite\" (cognate of \"failure\") is used for bankruptcy in accordance with the law.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina the national Act \"24.522 de Concursos y Quiebras\" regulates the Bankruptcy and the Reorganization of the individuals and companies, public entities are not included.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, bankruptcy is a status which applies to individuals and is governed by the federal \"Bankruptcy Act 1966\". Companies do not go bankrupt but rather go into liquidation or administration, which is governed by the federal \"Corporations Act 2001\".\nIf a person commits an act of bankruptcy, then a creditor can apply to the Federal Circuit Court or the Federal Court for a sequestration order. Acts of bankruptcy are defined in the legislation, and include the failure to comply with a bankruptcy notice. A bankruptcy notice can be issued where, among other cases, a person fails to pay a judgment debt. A person can also seek to have themself declared bankrupt by lodging a debtor's petition with the \"Official Receiver\", which is the Australian Financial Security Authority (AFSA).\nTo declare bankruptcy or for a creditor to lodge a petition, the debt must be at least $5,000.\nAll bankrupts must lodge a Statement of Affairs document with AFSA, which includes important information about their assets and liabilities. A bankruptcy cannot be annulled until this document has been lodged.\nOrdinarily, a bankruptcy lasts three years from the filing of the Statement of Affairs with AFSA.\nA Bankruptcy Trustee (in most cases, the Official Receiver) is appointed to deal with all matters regarding the administration of the bankrupt estate. The Trustee's job includes notifying creditors of the estate and dealing with creditor inquiries; ensuring that the bankrupt complies with their obligations under the Bankruptcy Act; investigating the bankrupt's financial affairs; realising funds to which the estate is entitled under the Bankruptcy Act and distributing dividends to creditors if sufficient funds become available.\nFor the duration of their bankruptcy, all bankrupts have certain restrictions placed upon them. For example, a bankrupt must obtain the permission of their trustee to travel overseas. Failure to do so may result in the bankrupt being stopped at the airport by the Australian Federal Police. Additionally, a bankrupt is required to provide their trustee with details of income and assets. If the bankrupt does not comply with the Trustee's request to provide details of income, the trustee may have grounds to lodge an Objection to Discharge, which has the effect of extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.\nThe realisation of funds usually comes from two main sources: the bankrupt's assets and the bankrupt's wages. There are certain assets that are protected, referred to as \"protected assets\". These include household furniture and appliances, tools of the trade and vehicles up to a certain value. All other assets of value are sold. If a house or car is above a certain value, a third party can buy the interest from the estate in order for the bankrupt to utilise the asset. If this is not done, the interest vests in the estate and the trustee is able to take possession of the asset and sell it.\nThe bankrupt must pay income contributions if their income is above a certain threshold. If the bankrupt fails to pay, the trustee can issue a notice to garnishee the bankrupt's wages. If that is not possible, the Trustee may seek to extend the bankruptcy for a further five years.\nBankruptcies can be annulled prior to the expiration of the normal three-year period if all debts are paid out in full. Sometimes a bankrupt may be able to raise enough funds to make an Offer of Composition to creditors, which would have the effect of paying the creditors some of the money they are owed. If the creditors accept the offer, the bankruptcy can be annulled after the funds are received.\nAfter the bankruptcy is annulled or the bankrupt has been automatically discharged, the bankrupt's credit report status is shown as \"discharged bankrupt\" for some years. The maximum number of years this information can be held is subject to the retention limits under the Privacy Act. How long such information is on a credit report may be shorter, depending on the issuing company, but the report must cease to record that information based on the criteria in the Privacy Act.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, the Bankruptcy Law (11.101/05) governs court-ordered or out-of-court receivership and bankruptcy and only applies to public companies (publicly traded companies) with the exception of financial institutions, credit cooperatives, consortia, supplementary scheme entities, companies administering health care plans, equity companies and a few other legal entities. It does not apply to state-run companies.\nCurrent law covers three legal proceedings. The first one is bankruptcy itself (\"Fal\u00eancia\"). Bankruptcy is a court-ordered liquidation procedure for an insolvent business. The final goal of bankruptcy is to liquidate company assets and pay its creditors.\nThe second one is Court-ordered Restructuring (\"Recupera\u00e7\u00e3o Judicial\"). The goal is to overcome the business crisis situation of the debtor in order to allow the continuation of the producer, the employment of workers and the interests of creditors, leading, thus, to preserving company, its corporate function and develop economic activity. It's a court procedure required by the debtor which has been in business for more than two years and requires approval by a judge.\nThe Extrajudicial Restructuring (\"Recupera\u00e7\u00e3o Extrajudicial\") is a private negotiation that involves creditors and debtors and, as with court-ordered restructuring, also must be approved by courts.\nCanada.\nBankruptcy, also referred to as insolvency in Canada, is governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act and is applicable to businesses and individuals. For example, Target Canada, the Canadian subsidiary of the Target Corporation, the second-largest discount retailer in the United States filed for bankruptcy on January 15, 2015, and closed all of its stores by April 12. The office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy, a federal agency, is responsible for overseeing that bankruptcies are administered in a fair and orderly manner by all licensed Trustees in Canada.\nTrustees in bankruptcy, 1041 individuals licensed to administer insolvencies, bankruptcy and proposal estates and are governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada.\nBankruptcy is filed when a person or a company becomes insolvent and cannot pay their debts as they become due and if they have at least $1,000 in debt.\nIn 2011, the Superintendent of bankruptcy reported that trustees in Canada filed 127,774 insolvent estates. Consumer estates were the vast majority, with 122 999 estates. The consumer portion of the 2011 volume is divided into 77,993 bankruptcies and 45,006 consumer proposals. This represented a reduction of 8.9% from 2010. Commercial estates filed by Canadian trustees in 2011 4,775 estates, 3,643 bankruptcies and 1,132 Division 1 proposals. This represents a reduction of 8.6% over 2010.\nSome of the duties of the trustee in bankruptcy are to:\nCreditors become involved by attending creditors' meetings. The trustee calls the first meeting of creditors for the following purposes:\nIn Canada, a person can file a consumer proposal as an alternative to bankruptcy. A consumer proposal is a negotiated settlement between a debtor and their creditors.\nA typical proposal would involve a debtor making monthly payments for a maximum of five years, with the funds distributed to their creditors. Even though most proposals call for payments of less than the full amount of the debt owing, in most cases, the creditors accept the deal\u2014because if they do not, the next alternative may be personal bankruptcy, in which the creditors get even less money. The creditors have 45 days to accept or reject the consumer proposal. Once the proposal is accepted by both the creditors and the Court, the debtor makes the payments to the Proposal Administrator each month (or as otherwise stipulated in their proposal), and the general creditors are prevented from taking any further legal or collection action. If the proposal is rejected, the debtor is returned to his prior insolvent state and may have no alternative but to declare personal bankruptcy.\nA consumer proposal can only be made by a debtor with debts to a maximum of $250,000 (not including the mortgage on their principal residence). If debts are greater than $250,000, the proposal must be filed under Division 1 of Part III of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. An Administrator is required in the Consumer Proposal, and a Trustee in the Division I Proposal (these are virtually the same although the terms are not interchangeable). A Proposal Administrator is almost always a licensed trustee in bankruptcy, although the Superintendent of Bankruptcy may appoint other people to serve as administrators.\nIn 2006, there were 98,450 personal insolvency filings in Canada: 79,218 bankruptcies and 19,232 consumer proposals.\nIn Canada, bankruptcy always means liquidation. There is no way for a company to emerge from bankruptcy after restructuring, as is the case in the United States with a Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. Canada does, however, have laws that allow for businesses to restructure and emerge later with a smaller debtload and a more positive financial future. While not technically a form of bankruptcy, businesses with $5M or more in debt may make use of the Companies Creditors' Arrangement Act to halt all debt recovery efforts against the company while they formulate a plan to restructure.\nChina.\nThe People's Republic of China legalized bankruptcy in 1986, and a revised law that was more expansive and complete was enacted in 2007.\nIreland.\nBankruptcy in Ireland applies only to natural persons. Other insolvency processes including liquidation and examinership are used to deal with corporate insolvency.\nIrish bankruptcy law has been the subject of significant comment, from both government sources and the media, as being in need of reform. Part 7 of the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 has started this process and the government has committed to further reform.\nIndia.\nThe Parliament of India in the first week of May 2016 passed Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 (New Code). Earlier a clear law on corporate bankruptcy did not exist, even though individual bankruptcy laws have been in existence since 1874. The earlier law in force was enacted in 1920 called the Provincial Insolvency Act.\nThe legal definitions of the terms bankruptcy, insolvency, liquidation and dissolution are contested in the Indian legal system. There is no regulation or statute legislated upon bankruptcy which denotes a condition of inability to meet a demand of a creditor as is common in many other jurisdictions.\nWinding up of companies was in the jurisdiction of the courts which can take a decade even after the company has actually been declared insolvent. On the other hand, supervisory restructuring at the behest of the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is generally undertaken using receivership by a public entity.\nThe Netherlands.\nDutch bankruptcy law is governed by the Dutch Bankruptcy Code (\"Faillissementswet\"). The code covers three separate legal proceedings. \nRussia.\nFederal Law No. 127-FZ \"On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)\" dated 26 October 2002 (as amended) (the \"Bankruptcy Act\"), replacing the previous law in 1998, to better address the above problems and a broader failure of the action.\nRussian insolvency law is intended for a wide range of borrowers: individuals and companies of all sizes, with the exception of state-owned enterprises, government agencies, political parties and religious organizations. There are also special rules for insurance companies, professional participants of the securities market, agricultural organizations and other special laws for financial institutions and companies in the natural monopolies in the energy industry.\nFederal Law No. 40-FZ \"On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)\" dated 25 February 1999 (as amended) (the \"Insolvency Law of Credit Institutions\") contains special provisions in relation to the opening of insolvency proceedings in relation to the credit company. Insolvency Provisions Act, credit organizations used in conjunction with the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act.\nBankruptcy law provides for the following stages of insolvency proceedings:\nThe main face of the bankruptcy process is the insolvency officer (trustee in bankruptcy, bankruptcy manager). At various stages of bankruptcy, he must be determined: the temporary officer in Monitoring procedure, external manager in External control, the receiver or administrative officer in The economic recovery, the liquidator. During the bankruptcy trustee in bankruptcy (insolvency officer) has a decisive influence on the movement of assets (property) of the debtor - the debtor and has a key influence on the economic and legal aspects of its operations.\nSwitzerland.\nUnder Swiss law, bankruptcy can be a consequence of insolvency. It is a court-ordered form of debt enforcement proceedings that applies, in general, to registered commercial entities only. In a bankruptcy, all assets of the debtor are liquidated under the administration of the creditors, although the law provides for debt restructuring options similar to those under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy code.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, bankruptcy (Swedish: konkurs) is a formal process that may involve a company or individual. It is not the same as insolvency, which is inability to pay debts that should have been paid. A creditor or the company itself can apply for bankruptcy. An external bankruptcy manager takes over the company or the assets of the person, and tries to sell as much as possible. A person or a company in bankruptcy can not access its assets (with some exceptions).\nThe formal bankruptcy process is rarely carried out for individuals. Creditors can claim money through the Enforcement Administration anyway, and creditors do not usually benefit from the bankruptcy of individuals because there are costs of a bankruptcy manager which has priority. Unpaid debts remain after bankruptcy for individuals. People who are deeply in debt can obtain a debt arrangement procedure (Swedish: skuldsanering). On application, they obtain a payment plan under which they pay as much as they can for five years, and then all remaining debts are cancelled. Debts that derive from a ban on business operations (issued by court, commonly for tax fraud or fraudulent business practices) or owed to a crime victim as compensation for damages, are exempted from this\u2014and, as before this process was introduced in 2006, remain lifelong. Debts that have not been claimed during a 3-10 year period are cancelled. Often crime victims stop their claims after a few years since criminals often do not have job incomes and might be hard to locate, while banks make sure their claims are not cancelled. The most common reasons for personal insolvency in Sweden are illness, unemployment, divorce or company bankruptcy.\nFor companies, formal bankruptcy is a normal effect of insolvency, even if there is a reconstruction mechanism where the company can be given time to solve its situation, e.g. by finding an investor. The formal bankruptcy involves contracting a bankruptcy manager, who makes certain that assets are sold and money divided by the priority the law claims, and no other way. Banks have such a priority. After a finished bankruptcy for a company, it is terminated. The activities might continue in a new company which has bought important assets from the bankrupted company.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBankruptcy in the United Kingdom (in a strict legal sense) relates only to individuals (including sole proprietors) and partnerships. Companies and other corporations enter into differently named legal insolvency procedures: liquidation and administration (administration order and administrative receivership). However, the term 'bankruptcy' is often used when referring to companies in the media and in general conversation. Bankruptcy in Scotland is referred to as sequestration. To apply for bankruptcy in Scotland, an individual must have more than \u00a31,500 of debt.\nA trustee in bankruptcy must be either an Official Receiver (a civil servant) or a licensed insolvency practitioner. Current law in England and Wales derives in large part from the Insolvency Act 1986. Following the introduction of the Enterprise Act 2002, a UK bankruptcy now normally last no longer than 12 months, and may be less if the Official Receiver files in court a certificate that investigations are complete. It was expected that the UK Government's liberalization of the UK bankruptcy regime would increase the number of bankruptcy cases; initially, cases increased, as the Insolvency Service statistics appear to bear out. Since 2009, the introduction of the Debt Relief Order has resulted in a dramatic fall in bankruptcies, the latest estimates for year 2014/15 being significantly less than 30,000 cases.\nThe UK bankruptcy law was changed in May 2000, effective May 29, 2000. Debtors may now retain occupational pensions while in bankruptcy, except in rare cases.\nThe Government have updated legislation (2016) to streamline the application process for UK bankruptcy. UK residents now need to apply online for bankruptcy - there is an upfront fee of \u00a3655. The process for residents of Northern Ireland differs - applicants must follow the older process of applying through the courts.\nUnited States.\nBankruptcy in the United States is a matter placed under federal jurisdiction by the United States Constitution (in Article 1, Section 8, Clause 4), which empowers Congress to enact \"uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States\". Congress has enacted statutes governing bankruptcy, primarily in the form of the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code.\nA debtor declares bankruptcy to obtain relief from debt, and this is normally accomplished either through a discharge of the debt or through a restructuring of the debt. When a debtor files a voluntary petition, their bankruptcy case commences.\nDebts and exemptions.\nWhile bankruptcy cases are always filed in United States Bankruptcy Court (an adjunct to the U.S. District Courts), bankruptcy cases, particularly with respect to the validity of claims and exemptions, are often dependent upon State law. A Bankruptcy Exemption defines the property a debtor may retain and preserve through bankruptcy. Certain real and personal property can be exempted on \"Schedule C\" of a debtor's bankruptcy forms, and effectively be taken outside the debtor's bankruptcy estate. Bankruptcy exemptions are available only to individuals filing bankruptcy.\nThere are two alternative systems that can be used to \"exempt\" property from a bankruptcy estate, federal exemptions (available in some states but not all), and state exemptions (which vary widely between states). For example, Maryland and Virginia, which are adjoining states, have different personal exemption amounts that cannot be seized for payment of debts. This amount is the first $6,000 in property or cash in Maryland, but normally only the first $5,000 in Virginia. State law therefore plays a major role in many bankruptcy cases, such that there may be significant differences in the outcome of a bankruptcy case depending upon the state in which it is filed.\nAfter a bankruptcy petition is filed, the court schedules a hearing called a \"341 meeting\" or \"meeting of creditors\", at which the bankruptcy trustee and creditors review the petitioner's petition and supporting schedules, question the petitioner, and can challenge exemptions they believe are improper.\nChapters.\nThere are six types of bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code:\nAn important feature applicable to all types of bankruptcy filings is the automatic stay. The automatic stay means that the mere request for bankruptcy protection automatically halts most lawsuits, repossessions, foreclosures, evictions, garnishments, attachments, utility shut-offs, and debt collection activity.\nThe most common types of personal bankruptcy for individuals are Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. Chapter 7, known as a \"straight bankruptcy\", involves the discharge of certain debts without repayment. Chapter 13 involves a plan of repayment of debts over a period of years. Whether a person qualifies for Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 is in part determined by income. As many as 65% of all US consumer bankruptcy filings are Chapter 7 cases.\nBefore a consumer may obtain bankruptcy relief under either Chapter 7 or Chapter 13, the debtor is to undertake credit counseling with approved counseling agencies prior to filing a bankruptcy petition and to undertake education in personal financial management from approved agencies prior to being granted a discharge of debts under either Chapter 7 or Chapter 13. Some studies of the operation of the credit counseling requirement suggest that it provides little benefit to debtors who receive the counseling because the only realistic option for many is to seek relief under the Bankruptcy Code.\nCorporations and other business forms normally file under Chapters 7 or 11.\nChapter 7.\nOften called \"straight bankruptcy\" or \"simple bankruptcy\", a Chapter 7 bankruptcy potentially allows debtors to eliminate most or all of their debts over a period of as little as three or four months. In a typical consumer bankruptcy, the only debts that survive a Chapter 7 are student loans, child support obligations, some tax bills, and criminal fines. Credit cards, pay day loans, personal loans, medical bills, and just about all other bills are discharged.\nIn Chapter 7, a debtor surrenders non-exempt property to a bankruptcy trustee, who then liquidates the property and distributes the proceeds to the debtor's unsecured creditors. In exchange, the debtor is entitled to a discharge of some debt. However, the debtor is not granted a discharge if guilty of certain types of inappropriate behavior (e.g., concealing records relating to financial condition) and certain debts (e.g., spousal and child support and most student loans). Some taxes are not discharged even though the debtor is generally discharged from debt. Many individuals in financial distress own only exempt property (e.g., clothes, household goods, an older car, or the tools of their trade or profession) and do not have to surrender any property to the trustee. The amount of property that a debtor may exempt varies from state to state (as noted above, Virginia and Maryland have a $1,000 difference.) Chapter 7 relief is available only once in any eight-year period. Generally, the rights of secured creditors to their collateral continues, even though their debt is discharged. For example, absent some arrangement by a debtor to surrender a car or \"reaffirm\" a debt, the creditor with a security interest in the debtor's car may repossess the car even if the debt to the creditor is discharged.\nNinety-one percent of US individuals who petition for relief under Chapter 7 hire an attorney to file their petitions. The typical cost of an attorney is $1,170.00. Alternatives to filing with an attorney are: filing pro se, hiring a non-lawyer petition preparer, or using online software to generate the petition.\nTo be eligible to file a consumer bankruptcy under Chapter 7, a debtor must qualify under a statutory \"means test\". The means test was intended to make it more difficult for a significant number of financially distressed individual debtors whose debts are primarily consumer debts to qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. The \"means test\" is employed in cases where an individual with primarily consumer debts has more than the average annual income for a household of equivalent size, computed over a 180-day period prior to filing. If the individual must \"take\" the \"means test\", their average monthly income over this 180-day period is reduced by a series of allowances for living expenses and secured debt payments in a very complex calculation that may or may not accurately reflect that individual's actual monthly budget. If the results of the means test show no disposable income (or in some cases a very small amount) then the individual qualifies for Chapter 7 relief. An individual who fails the means test will have their Chapter 7 case dismissed, or may have to convert the case to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy.\nIf a debtor does not qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code, either because of the Means Test or because Chapter 7 does not provide a permanent solution to delinquent payments for secured debts, such as mortgages or vehicle loans, the debtor may still seek relief under Chapter 13 of the Code.\nGenerally, a trustee sells most of the debtor's assets to pay off creditors. However, certain debtor assets will be protected to some extent by bankruptcy exemptions. These include Social Security payments, unemployment compensation, limited equity in a home, car, or truck, household goods and appliances, trade tools, and books. However, these exemptions vary from state to state.\nChapter 11.\nIn Chapter 11 bankruptcy, the debtor retains ownership and control of assets and is re-termed a debtor in possession (DIP). The debtor in possession runs the day-to-day operations of the business while creditors and the debtor work with the Bankruptcy Court in order to negotiate and complete a plan. Upon meeting certain requirements (e.g., fairness among creditors, priority of certain creditors) creditors are permitted to vote on the proposed plan. If a plan is confirmed, the debtor continues to operate and pay debts under the terms of the confirmed plan. If a specified majority of creditors do not vote to confirm a plan, additional requirements may be imposed by the court in order to confirm the plan. Debtors filing for Chapter 11 protection a second time are known informally as \"Chapter 22\" filers.\nIn a corporate or business bankruptcy, an indebted company is typically recapitalized so that it emerges from bankruptcy with more equity and less debt, with potential for dispute over the valuation of the reorganized business.\nChapter 13.\nIn Chapter 13, debtors retain ownership and possession of all their assets but must devote some portion of future income to repaying creditors, generally over three to five years. The amount of payment and period of the repayment plan depend upon a variety of factors, including the value of the debtor's property and the amount of a debtor's income and expenses. Under this chapter, the debtor can propose a repayment plan in which to pay creditors over three to five years. If the monthly income is less than the state's median income, the plan is for three years, unless the court finds \"just cause\" to extend the plan for a longer period. If the debtor's monthly income is greater than the median income for individuals in the debtor's state, the plan must generally be for five years. A plan cannot exceed the five-year limit.\nRelief under Chapter 13 is available only to individuals with regular income whose debts do not exceed prescribed limits. If the debtor is an individual or a sole proprietor, the debtor is allowed to file for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to repay all or part of the debts. Secured creditors may be entitled to greater payment than unsecured creditors.\nIn contrast to Chapter 7, the debtor in Chapter 13 may keep all property, whether or not exempt. If the plan appears feasible and if the debtor complies with all the other requirements, the bankruptcy court typically confirms the plan and the debtor and creditors are bound by its terms. Creditors have no say in the formulation of the plan, other than to object to it, if appropriate, on the grounds that it does not comply with one of the Code's statutory requirements. Generally, the debtor makes payments to a trustee who disburses the funds in accordance with the terms of the confirmed plan.\nWhen the debtor completes payments pursuant to the terms of the plan, the court formally grant the debtor a discharge of the debts provided for in the plan. However, if the debtor fails to make the agreed upon payments or fails to seek or gain court approval of a modified plan, a bankruptcy court will normally dismiss the case on the motion of the trustee. After a dismissal, creditors may resume pursuit of state law remedies to recover the unpaid debt.\nEurope.\nIn 2004, the number of insolvencies reached record highs in many European countries. In France, company insolvencies rose by more than 4%, in Austria by more than 10%, and in Greece by more than 20%. The increase in the number of insolvencies, however, does not indicate the total financial impact of insolvencies in each country because there is no indication of the size of each case. An increase in the number of bankruptcy cases does not necessarily entail an increase in bad debt write-off rates for the economy as a whole.\nBankruptcy statistics are also a trailing indicator. There is a time delay between financial difficulties and bankruptcy. In most cases, several months or even years pass between the financial problems and the start of bankruptcy proceedings. Legal, tax, and cultural issues may further distort bankruptcy figures, especially when comparing on an international basis. Two examples:\nThe insolvency numbers for private individuals also do not show the whole picture. Only a fraction of heavily indebted households file for insolvency. Two of the main reasons for this are the stigma of declaring themselves insolvent and the potential business disadvantage.\nFollowing the soar in insolvencies in the last decade, a number of European countries, such as France, Germany, Spain and Italy, began to revamp their bankruptcy laws in 2013. They modelled these new laws after the image of Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Currently, the majority of insolvency cases have ended in liquidation in Europe rather than the businesses surviving the crisis. These new law models are meant to change this; lawmakers are hoping to turn bankruptcy into a chance for restructuring rather than a death sentence for the companies.\nEffective sovereign bankruptcy.\nTechnically, states do not collapse directly due to a sovereign default event itself. However, the tumultuous events that follow may bring down the state, so in common language we do describe states as being bankrupted.\nSome examples of this are when a Korean state bankrupted Imperial China causing its destruction, or more specifically, when Chang'an's (Sui Dynasty) war with Pyongyang (Goguryeo) in 614 A.D. ended in the former's disintegration within 4 years, although the latter also seemingly entered into decline and fell some 56 years later. Another example is when the United States, with heavy financial backing from its allies (creditors), bankrupted the Soviet Union which led to the latter's demise."}
{"id": "4696", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4696", "title": "British Prime Minister", "text": ""}
{"id": "4697", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4697", "title": "United Kingdom general election", "text": ""}
{"id": "4699", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4699", "title": "Blissymbols", "text": "Blissymbols or Blissymbolics is a constructed language conceived as an ideographic writing system called Semantography consisting of several hundred basic symbols, each representing a concept, which can be composed together to generate new symbols that represent new concepts. Blissymbols differ from most of the world's major writing systems in that the characters do not correspond at all to the sounds of any spoken language.\nBlissymbols was published by Charles K. Bliss in 1949 and found use in the education of people with communication difficulties.\nHistory.\nBlissymbols was invented by Charles K. Bliss (1897\u20131985), born Karl Kasiel Blitz in the Austro-Hungarian city of Czernowitz (at present the Ukrainian city of Chernivtsi), which had a mixture of different nationalities that \"hated each other, mainly because they spoke and thought in different languages.\" \nBliss graduated as a chemical engineer at the Vienna University of Technology, and joined an electronics company as a research chemist.\nAfter the annexation of Austria into Nazi Germany in 1938, Bliss, a Jew, was sent to the concentration camps of Dachau and Buchenwald. His German wife Claire managed to get him released, and they finally became exiles in Shanghai, where Bliss had a cousin.\nBliss devised Blissymbols while a refugee at the Shanghai Ghetto and Sydney, from 1942 to 1949. He wanted to create an easy-to-learn international auxiliary language to allow communication between different linguistic communities. He was inspired by Chinese characters, with which he became familiar at Shanghai.\nBliss's system was explained in his work \"Semantography\" (1949, 2nd ed. 1965, 3rd ed. 1978.)\nIt had several names:\nAs the \"tourist explosion\" took place in the 1960s, a number of researchers were looking for new standard symbols to be used at roads, stations, airports, etc. Bliss then adopted the name \"Blissymbolics\" in order that no researcher could plagiarize his system of symbols.\nSince the 1960s/1970s, Blissymbols have become popular as a method to teach disabled people to communicate.\nIn 1971 Shirley McNaughton started a pioneer program at the Ontario Crippled Children's Centre (OCCC), aimed at children with cerebral palsy, from the approach of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC). According to Arika Okrent, Bliss used to complain about the way the teachers at the OCCC were using the symbols, in relation with the proportions of the symbols and other questions: for example, they used \"fancy\" terms like \"nouns\" and \"verbs\", to describe what Bliss called \"things\" and \"actions\". (2009, p.\u00a0173-4).\nThe ultimate objective of the OCCC program was to use Blissymbols as a practical way to teach the children to express themselves in their mother tongue, since the Blissymbols provided visual keys to understand the meaning of the English words, especially the abstract words.\nIn his work \"Semantography\" Bliss had not provided a systematic set of definitions for his symbols (there was a provisional vocabulary index instead (1965, pp.\u00a0827\u201367)), so McNaughton's team might often interpret a certain symbol in a way that Bliss would later criticize as a \"misinterpretation\". For example, they might interpret a tomato as a vegetable \u2014according to the English definition of tomato\u2014 even though the ideal Blissymbol of vegetable was restricted by Bliss to just vegetables growing underground. Eventually the OCCC staff modified and adapted Bliss's system in order to make it serve as a bridge to English. (2009, p.\u00a0189) Bliss' complaints about his symbols \"being abused\" by the OCCC became so intense that the director of the OCCC told Bliss, on his 1974 visit, never to come back. In spite of this, in 1975 Bliss granted an exclusive world license, for use with disabled children, to the new Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton (later called Blissymbolics Communication International, BCI). Nevertheless, in 1977 Bliss claimed that this agreement was violated so that he was deprived of effective control of his symbol system.\nAccording to Okrent (2009, p.\u00a0190), there was a final period of conflict, as Bliss would make continuous criticisms to McNaughton often followed by apologies. Bliss finally brought his lawyers back to the OCCC, and both parts reached a settlement:\nBlissymbolic Communication International now claims an exclusive license from Bliss, for the use and publication of Blissymbols for persons with communication, language, and learning difficulties.\nThe Blissymbol method has been used in Canada, Sweden, and a few other countries. Practitioners of Blissymbolics (that is, speech and language therapists and users) maintain that some users who have learned to communicate with Blissymbolics find it easier to learn to read and write traditional orthography in the local spoken language than do users who did not know Blissymbolics.\nThe speech question.\nUnlike similar constructed languages like aUI, Blissymbolics was conceived as a purely visual, speech-less language, on the premise that \"interlinguistic communication is mainly carried on by reading and writing\". Nevertheless, Bliss suggested that a set of international words could be adopted, so that \"a kind of spoken language could be established \u2013 as a travelling aid only\". (1965, p.\u00a089\u201390).\nSo, whether Blissymbolics constitutes an unspoken language is a controversial question, whatever its practical utility may be. Some linguists, such as John DeFrancis and J. Marshall Unger have argued that genuine ideographic writing systems with the same capacities as natural languages do not exist.\nSemantics.\nBliss' concern about semantics finds an early referent in John Locke, whose \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" prevented people from those \"vague and insignificant forms of speech\" that may give the impression of being deep learning.\nAnother vital referent is Leibniz\u2019s project of an ideographic language called \"universal character\", based on the principles of Chinese characters. It would contain small figures representing \"visible things by their lines, and the invisible, by the visible which accompany them\", as well as adding \"certain additional marks, suitable to make understood the flexions and the particles.\" (1965, p.\u00a0569). Bliss stated that his own work was an attempt to take up the thread of Leibniz's project.\nFinally there is a strong influence by the work \"The Meaning of Meaning\" (1923) by C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards, which was considered a standard work on semantics. Bliss found especially useful their \"triangle of reference\": the physical thing or \"referent\" that we perceive would be represented at the right vertex; the meaning that we know by experience (our implicit definition of the thing), at the top vertex; and the physical word that we speak or symbol we write, at the left vertex. The reversed process would happen when we read or listen to words: from the words, we recall meanings, related to referents which may be real things or unreal \"fictions\". Bliss was particularly concerned with political propaganda, whose discourses would tend to contain words that correspond to unreal or ambiguous referents.\nGrammar.\nThe grammar of Blissymbols is based on a certain interpretation of nature, dividing it into matter (material things), energy (actions), and human values (mental evaluations). In an ordinary language, these would give place respectively to substantives, verbs, and adjectives. In Blissymbols, they are marked respectively by a small square symbol, a small cone symbol, and a small V or inverted cone. These symbols may be placed above any other symbol, turning it respectively into a \"thing\", an \"action\", and an \"evaluation\":\nWhen a symbol is not marked by any of the three grammar symbols (square, cone, inverted cone), it may refer to a non material thing, a grammatical particle, etc.\nExamples.\nThe symbol above represents the expression \"world language\", which was a first tentative name for Blissymbols.\nIt combines the symbol for \"writing tool\" or \"pen\" (a line inclined, as a pen being used) with the symbol for \"world\", which in its turn combines \"ground\" or \"earth\" (a horizontal line below) and its counterpart derivate \"sky\" (a horizontal line above). Thus the world would be seen as \"what is among the ground and the sky\", and \"Blissymbols\" would be seen as \"the writing tool to express the world\". This is clearly distinct from the symbol of \"language\", which is a combination of \"mouth\" and \"ear\". Thus natural languages are mainly oral, while Blissymbols is just a writing system dealing with semantics, not phonetics.\nThe 900 individual symbols of the system are called \"Bliss-characters\"; these may be \"ideographic\" \u2013 representing abstract concepts, \"pictographic\" \u2013 a direct representation of objects, or \"composite\" \u2013 in which two or more existing Bliss-characters have been superimposed to represent a new meaning. Size, orientation and relation to the \"skyline\" and \"earthline\" affects the meaning of each symbol. A single concept is called a \"Bliss-word\", which can consist of one or more Bliss-characters. In the case of multiple character Bliss-words, the main character is called the \"classifier\" which \"indicates the semantic or grammatical category to which the Bliss-word belongs\". To this can be added Bliss-characters as prefixes or suffixes called \"modifiers\" which amend the meaning of the first symbol. A further symbol, called an \"indicator\" can be added adjacent to the Bliss-word; these are used as \"grammatical and/or semantic markers.\"\nThis sentence means \"I want to go to the cinema.\" This example shows several features of Blissymbolics:\nTowards the international standardization of the script.\nBlissymbolics was used in 1971 to help children at the Ontario Crippled Children's Centre (OCCC, now the Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital) in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Since it was important that the children see consistent pictures, OCCC had a draftsman named Jim Grice draw the symbols. Both Charles K. Bliss and Margrit Beesley at the OCCC worked with Grice to ensure consistency. In 1975, a new organization named Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton led this effort. Over the years, this organization changed its name to Blissymbolics Communication Institute, Easter Seal Communication Institute, and ultimately to Blissymbolics Communication International (BCI).\nBCI is an international group of people who act as an authority regarding the standardization of the Blissymbolics language. It has taken responsibility for any extensions of the Blissymbolics language as well as any maintenance needed for the language. BCI has coordinated usage of the language since 1971 for augmentative and alternative communication. BCI received a licence and copyright through legal agreements with Charles K. Bliss in 1975 and 1982. Limiting the count of Bliss-characters (there are currently about 900) is very useful in order to help the user community. It also helps when implementing Blissymbolics using technology such as computers.\nIn 1991, BCI published a reference guide containing 2300 vocabulary items and detailed rules for the graphic design of additional characters, so they settled a first set of approved \"Bliss-words\" for general use.\nThe Standards Council of Canada then sponsored, on January 21, 1993, the registration of an encoded character set for use in ISO/IEC 2022, in the ISO-IR international registry of coded character sets.\nAfter many years of requests, the Blissymbolic language was finally approved as an encoded language, with code , into the ISO 639-2 and ISO 639-3 standards.\nA proposal was posted by Michael Everson for the Blissymbolics script to be included in the Universal Character Set (UCS) and encoded for use with the ISO/IEC 10646 and Unicode standards. BCI would cooperate with the Unicode Technical Committee (UTC) and the ISO Working Group.\nThe proposed encoding does not use the lexical encoding model used in the existing ISO-IR/169 registered character set, but instead applies the Unicode and ISO character-glyph model to the \"Bliss-character\" model already adopted by BCI, since this would significantly reduce the number of needed characters. Bliss-characters can now be used in a creative way to create many new arbitrary concepts, by surrounding the invented words with special Bliss indicators (similar to punctuation), something which was not possible in the ISO-IR/169 encoding.\nHowever, at the end of 2009, the Blissymbolic script is still not encoded in the UCS. Some questions are still unanswered, such as the inclusion in the BCI repertoire of some characters (currently about 24) that are already encoded in the UCS (like digits, punctuation signs, spaces and some markers), but whose unification may cause problems due to the very strict graphical layouts required by the published Bliss reference guides. In addition, the character metrics use a specific layout where the usual baseline is not used, and the ideographic em-square is not relevant for Bliss character designs, that use additional \"earth line\" and \"sky line\" to define the composition square. \nSome fonts supporting the BCI repertoire are available and usable with texts encoded with private-use assignments (PUA) within the UCS. But only the private BCI encoding based on ISO-IR/169 registration is available for text interchange."}
{"id": "4700", "revid": "1012490276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4700", "title": "Bessel function", "text": "Bessel functions, first defined by the mathematician Daniel Bernoulli and then generalized by Friedrich Bessel, are canonical solutions of Bessel's differential equation\nfor an arbitrary complex number , the \"order\" of the Bessel function. Although and produce the same differential equation, it is conventional to define different Bessel functions for these two values in such a way that the Bessel functions are mostly smooth functions of .\nThe most important cases are when is an integer or half-integer. Bessel functions for integer are also known as cylinder functions or the cylindrical harmonics because they appear in the solution to Laplace's equation in cylindrical coordinates. Spherical Bessel functions with half-integer are obtained when the Helmholtz equation is solved in spherical coordinates.\nApplications of Bessel functions.\nBessel's equation arises when finding separable solutions to Laplace's equation and the Helmholtz equation in cylindrical or spherical coordinates. Bessel functions are therefore especially important for many problems of wave propagation and static potentials. In solving problems in cylindrical coordinate systems, one obtains Bessel functions of integer order (); in spherical problems, one obtains half-integer orders (). For example:\nBessel functions also appear in other problems, such as signal processing (e.g., see FM synthesis, Kaiser window, or Bessel filter).\nDefinitions.\nBecause this is a second-order linear differential equation, there must be two linearly independent solutions. Depending upon the circumstances, however, various formulations of these solutions are convenient. Different variations are summarized in the table below and described in the following sections.\nBessel functions of the second kind and the spherical Bessel functions of the second kind are sometimes denoted by and , respectively, rather than and .\nBessel functions of the first kind:.\nBessel functions of the first kind, denoted as , are solutions of Bessel's differential equation. For integer or positive\u00a0, Bessel functions of the first kind are finite at the origin (); while for negative non-integer\u00a0, Bessel functions of the first kind diverge as approaches zero. It is possible to define the function by its series expansion around , which can be found by applying the Frobenius method to Bessel's equation:\nwhere is the gamma function, a shifted generalization of the factorial function to non-integer values. The Bessel function of the first kind is an entire function if is an integer, otherwise it is a multivalued function with singularity at zero. The graphs of Bessel functions look roughly like oscillating sine or cosine functions that decay proportionally to formula_3 (see also their asymptotic forms below), although their roots are not generally periodic, except asymptotically for large . (The series indicates that is the derivative of , much like is the derivative of ; more generally, the derivative of can be expressed in terms of by the identities below.)\nFor non-integer , the functions and are linearly independent, and are therefore the two solutions of the differential equation. On the other hand, for integer order , the following relationship is valid (the gamma function has simple poles at each of the non-positive integers):\nThis means that the two solutions are no longer linearly independent. In this case, the second linearly independent solution is then found to be the Bessel function of the second kind, as discussed below.\nBessel's integrals.\nAnother definition of the Bessel function, for integer values of , is possible using an integral representation:\nAnother integral representation is:\nThis was the approach that Bessel used, and from this definition he derived several properties of the function. The definition may be extended to non-integer orders by one of Schl\u00e4fli's integrals, for :\nRelation to hypergeometric series.\nThe Bessel functions can be expressed in terms of the generalized hypergeometric series as\nThis expression is related to the development of Bessel functions in terms of the Bessel\u2013Clifford function.\nRelation to Laguerre polynomials.\nIn terms of the Laguerre polynomials and arbitrarily chosen parameter , the Bessel function can be expressed as\nBessel functions of the second kind:.\nThe Bessel functions of the second kind, denoted by , occasionally denoted instead by , are solutions of the Bessel differential equation that have a singularity at the origin () and are multivalued. These are sometimes called Weber functions, as they were introduced by , and also Neumann functions after Carl Neumann.\nFor non-integer , is related to by\nIn the case of integer order , the function is defined by taking the limit as a non-integer tends to :\nIf is a nonnegative integer, we have the series\nwhere formula_13 is the digamma function, the logarithmic derivative of the gamma function.\nThere is also a corresponding integral formula (for ):\n is necessary as the second linearly independent solution of the Bessel's equation when is an integer. But has more meaning than that. It can be considered as a \"natural\" partner of . See also the subsection on Hankel functions below.\nWhen is an integer, moreover, as was similarly the case for the functions of the first kind, the following relationship is valid:\nBoth and are holomorphic functions of on the complex plane cut along the negative real axis. When is an integer, the Bessel functions are entire functions of . If is held fixed at a non-zero value, then the Bessel functions are entire functions of .\nThe Bessel functions of the second kind when is an integer is an example of the second kind of solution in Fuchs's theorem.\nHankel functions: ,.\nAnother important formulation of the two linearly independent solutions to Bessel's equation are the Hankel functions of the first and second kind, and , defined as\nwhere is the imaginary unit. These linear combinations are also known as Bessel functions of the third kind; they are two linearly independent solutions of Bessel's differential equation. They are named after Hermann Hankel.\nThese forms of linear combination satisfy numerous simple-looking properties, like asymptotic formulae or integral representations. Here, \"simple\" means an appearance of a factor of the form . For real formula_17 where formula_18, formula_19 are real-valued, the Bessel functions of the first and second kind are the real and imaginary parts, respectively, of the first Hankel function and the real and negative imaginary parts of the second Hankel function. Thus, the above formulae are analogs of Euler's formula, substituting , for formula_20 and formula_18, formula_19 for formula_23, formula_24, as explicitly shown in the asymptotic expansion.\nThe Hankel functions are used to express outward- and inward-propagating cylindrical-wave solutions of the cylindrical wave equation, respectively (or vice versa, depending on the sign convention for the frequency).\nUsing the previous relationships, they can be expressed as\nIf is an integer, the limit has to be calculated. The following relationships are valid, whether is an integer or not:\nIn particular, if with a nonnegative integer, the above relations imply directly that\nThese are useful in developing the spherical Bessel functions (see below).\nThe Hankel functions admit the following integral representations for :\nwhere the integration limits indicate integration along a contour that can be chosen as follows: from to 0 along the negative real axis, from 0 to along the imaginary axis, and from to along a contour parallel to the real axis.\nModified Bessel functions: ,.\nThe Bessel functions are valid even for complex arguments , and an important special case is that of a purely imaginary argument. In this case, the solutions to the Bessel equation are called the modified Bessel functions (or occasionally the hyperbolic Bessel functions) of the first and second kind and are defined as\nwhen is not an integer; when is an integer, then the limit is used. These are chosen to be real-valued for real and positive arguments . The series expansion for is thus similar to that for , but without the alternating factor.\nformula_30 can be expressed in terms of Hankel functions:\nWe can express the first and second Bessel functions in terms of the modified Bessel functions (these are valid if ):\n and are the two linearly independent solutions to the modified Bessel's equation:\nUnlike the ordinary Bessel functions, which are oscillating as functions of a real argument, and are exponentially growing and decaying functions respectively. Like the ordinary Bessel function , the function goes to zero at for and is finite at for . Analogously, diverges at with the singularity being of logarithmic type for , and otherwise.\nTwo integral formulas for the modified Bessel functions are (for ):\nBessel functions can be described as Fourier transforms of powers of quadratic functions. For example:\nIt can be proven by showing equality to the above integral definition for . This is done by integrating a closed curve in the first quadrant of the complex plane.\nModified Bessel functions and can be represented in terms of rapidly convergent integrals\nThe modified Bessel function of the second kind has also been called by the following names (now rare):\nSpherical Bessel functions: ,.\nWhen solving the Helmholtz equation in spherical coordinates by separation of variables, the radial equation has the form\nThe two linearly independent solutions to this equation are called the spherical Bessel functions and , and are related to the ordinary Bessel functions and by\n is also denoted or ; some authors call these functions the spherical Neumann functions.\nThe spherical Bessel functions can also be written as (Rayleigh's formulas)\nThe zeroth spherical Bessel function is also known as the (unnormalized) sinc function. The first few spherical Bessel functions are:\nand\nGenerating function.\nThe spherical Bessel functions have the generating functions\nDifferential relations.\nIn the following, is any of , , , for \nSpherical Hankel functions: ,.\nThere are also spherical analogues of the Hankel functions:\nIn fact, there are simple closed-form expressions for the Bessel functions of half-integer order in terms of the standard trigonometric functions, and therefore for the spherical Bessel functions. In particular, for non-negative integers :\nand is the complex-conjugate of this (for real ). It follows, for example, that and , and so on.\nThe spherical Hankel functions appear in problems involving spherical wave propagation, for example in the multipole expansion of the electromagnetic field.\nRiccati\u2013Bessel functions: , , ,.\nRiccati\u2013Bessel functions only slightly differ from spherical Bessel functions:\nThey satisfy the differential equation\nFor example, this kind of differential equation appears in quantum mechanics while solving the radial component of the Schr\u00f6dinger's equation with hypothetical cylindrical infinite potential barrier. This differential equation, and the Riccati\u2013Bessel solutions, also arises in the problem of scattering of electromagnetic waves by a sphere, known as Mie scattering after the first published solution by Mie (1908). See e.g., Du (2004) for recent developments and references.\nFollowing Debye (1909), the notation , is sometimes used instead of , .\nAsymptotic forms.\nThe Bessel functions have the following asymptotic forms. For small arguments , one obtains, when is not a negative integer:\nWhen is a negative integer, we have\nFor the Bessel function of the second kind we have three cases:\nwhere is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant (0.5772...).\nFor large real arguments , one cannot write a true asymptotic form for Bessel functions of the first and second kind (unless is half-integer) because they have zeros all the way out to infinity, which would have to be matched exactly by any asymptotic expansion. However, for a given value of one can write an equation containing a term of order :\n(For the last terms in these formulas drop out completely; see the spherical Bessel functions above.) Even though these equations are true, better approximations may be available for complex . For example, when is near the negative real line is approximated better by\nthan by\nThe asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions are:\nThese can be extended to other values of using equations relating and to and .\nIt is interesting that although the Bessel function of the first kind is the average of the two Hankel functions, is not asymptotic to the average of these two asymptotic forms when is negative (because one or the other will not be correct there, depending on the used). But the asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions permit us to write asymptotic forms for the Bessel functions of first and second kinds for \"complex\" (non-real) so long as goes to infinity at a constant phase angle (using the square root having positive real part):\nFor the modified Bessel functions, Hankel developed asymptotic (large argument) expansions as well:\nThere is also the asymptotic form (for large real formula_57)\nformula_58.\nWhen , all the terms except the first vanish, and we have\nFor small arguments , we have\nFull domain approximations with elementary functions.\nA very good approximation (error below formula_61 of the maximum value 1) of the Bessel function formula_62 for an arbitrary value of the argument may be obtained with the elementary functions by joining the trigonometric approximation working for smaller values of with the expression containing attenuated cosine function valid for large arguments with a usage of the smooth transition function formula_63 i.e.\nProperties.\nFor integer order , is often defined via a Laurent series for a generating function:\nan approach used by P. A. Hansen in 1843. (This can be generalized to non-integer order by contour integration or other methods.) Another important relation for integer orders is the \"Jacobi\u2013Anger expansion\":\nand\nwhich is used to expand a plane wave as a sum of cylindrical waves, or to find the Fourier series of a tone-modulated FM signal.\nMore generally, a series\nis called Neumann expansion of . The coefficients for have the explicit form\nwhere is Neumann's polynomial.\nSelected functions admit the special representation\nwith\ndue to the orthogonality relation\nMore generally, if has a branch-point near the origin of such a nature that\nthen\nor\nwhere formula_76 is the Laplace transform of .\nAnother way to define the Bessel functions is the Poisson representation formula and the Mehler-Sonine formula:\nwhere and .\nThis formula is useful especially when working with Fourier transforms.\nBecause Bessel's equation becomes Hermitian (self-adjoint) if it is divided by , the solutions must satisfy an orthogonality relationship for appropriate boundary conditions. In particular, it follows that:\nwhere , is the Kronecker delta, and is the th zero of . This orthogonality relation can then be used to extract the coefficients in the Fourier\u2013Bessel series, where a function is expanded in the basis of the functions for fixed and varying .\nAn analogous relationship for the spherical Bessel functions follows immediately:\nIf one defines a boxcar function of that depends on a small parameter as:\n(where is the rectangle function) then the Hankel transform of it (of any given order ), , approaches as approaches zero, for any given . Conversely, the Hankel transform (of the same order) of is :\nwhich is zero everywhere except near 1. As approaches zero, the right-hand side approaches , where is the Dirac delta function. This admits the limit (in the distributional sense):\nA change of variables then yields the \"closure equation\":\nfor . The Hankel transform can express a fairly arbitrary function as an integral of Bessel functions of different scales. For the spherical Bessel functions the orthogonality relation is:\nfor .\nAnother important property of Bessel's equations, which follows from Abel's identity, involves the Wronskian of the solutions:\nwhere and are any two solutions of Bessel's equation, and is a constant independent of (which depends on \u03b1 and on the particular Bessel functions considered). In particular,\nand\nfor .\nFor , the even entire function of genus 1, , has only real zeros. Let\nbe all its positive zeros, then\nRecurrence relations.\nThe functions , , , and all satisfy the recurrence relations\nand\nwhere denotes , , , or . These two identities are often combined, e.g. added or subtracted, to yield various other relations. In this way, for example, one can compute Bessel functions of higher orders (or higher derivatives) given the values at lower orders (or lower derivatives). In particular, it follows that\n\"Modified\" Bessel functions follow similar relations:\nand\nand\nThe recurrence relation reads\nwhere denotes or . These recurrence relations are useful for discrete diffusion problems.\nMultiplication theorem.\nThe Bessel functions obey a multiplication theorem\nwhere and may be taken as arbitrary complex numbers. For , the above expression also holds if is replaced by . The analogous identities for modified Bessel functions and are\nand\nZeros of the Bessel function.\nBourget's hypothesis.\nBessel himself originally proved that for nonnegative integers , the equation has an infinite number of solutions in . When the functions are plotted on the same graph, though, none of the zeros seem to coincide for different values of except for the zero at . This phenomenon is known as Bourget's hypothesis after the 19th-century French mathematician who studied Bessel functions. Specifically it states that for any integers and , the functions and have no common zeros other than the one at . The hypothesis was proved by Carl Ludwig Siegel in 1929.\nNumerical approaches.\nFor numerical studies about the zeros of the Bessel function, see , and ."}
{"id": "4701", "revid": "1009961880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4701", "title": "Backpacking", "text": "Backpacking may refer to:"}
{"id": "4702", "revid": "1012194604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4702", "title": "Brahui language", "text": "Brahui (; ) is a Dravidian language spoken primarily by the Brahui people in the central part of Balochistan Province, in Pakistan and in scattered parts of Iran, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan and by expatriate Brahui communities in Iraq, Qatar and United Arab Emirates. It is isolated from the nearest Dravidian-speaking neighbour population of South India by a distance of more than . The Kalat, Khuzdar, Mastung, Quetta, Bolan, Nasirabad, Noshki, and Kharan districts of Balochistan Province are predominantly Brahui-speaking. Brahui is also spoken in Sindh, mostly in Larkana and Nawabshah divisions.\nDistribution.\nBrahui is spoken in the central part of Pakistani Balochistan, mainly in Kalat, Khuzdar and Mastung districts, but also in smaller numbers in neighboring districts, as well as in Afghanistan which borders Pakistani Balochistan; however, many members of the ethnic group no longer speak Brahui. There are also an unknown very small number of expatriate Brahuis in the Arab States of the Persian Gulf, Iranian Balochistan and Turkmenistan.\nHistory.\nThere is no consensus as to whether Brahui is a relatively recent language introduced into Balochistan or remnant of an older widespread Dravidian language family. According to Josef Elfenbein (1989), the most common theory is that the Brahui were part of a Dravidian invasion of north-western India in the 3rd millennium BC, but unlike other Dravidians who migrated to the south, they remained in Sarawan and Jahlawan since before 2000 BC. However, some other scholars see it as a recent migrant language to its present region. They postulate that Brahui could only have migrated to Balochistan from central India after 1000 AD. This is contradicted by genetic evidence that shows the Brahui population to be indistinguishable from neighbouring Balochi speakers, and genetically distant from central Dravidian speakers. The main Iranian contributor to Brahui vocabulary, Balochi, is a Northwestern Iranian language, and moved to the area from the west only around 1000 AD., One scholar places the migration as late as the 13th or 14th century.\nSouthworth (2012) proposes that Brahui is not a Dravidian language, but can be linked with the remaining Dravidian languages and Elamite to form the \u201cZagrosian family\u201d which originated in Southwest Asia (southern Iran) and was widely distributed in South Asia and parts of eastern West Asia before the Indo-Aryan migration.\nDialects.\nThere are no important dialectal differences. Jhalawani (southern, centered on Khuzdar) and Sarawani (northern, centered on Kalat) dialects are distinguished by the pronunciation of *h, which is retained only in the north (Elfenbein 1997).\nBrahui has been influenced by the Iranian languages spoken in the area, including Persian, Balochi and Pashto.\nPhonology.\nBrahui vowels show a partial length distinction between long and diphthongs and short .\nBrahui consonants show patterns of retroflexion but lack the aspiration distinctions found in surrounding languages and include several fricatives such as the voiceless lateral fricative , a sound not otherwise found in the region.\nConsonants are also very similar to those of Balochi, but Brahui has more fricatives and nasals (Elfenbein 1993).\nStress.\nStress in Brahui follows a quantity-based pattern, occurring either on the first long vowel or diphthong, or on the first syllable if all vowels are short.\nOrthography.\nArabic script.\nBrahui is the only Dravidian language which is not known to have been written in a Brahmi-based script; instead, it has been written in the Arabic script since the second half of the 20th century.\nIn Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, the Nasta\u02bfl\u012bq script is used in writing.\nLatin script.\nMore recently, a Roman-based orthography named Brolikva (an abbreviation of \"Brahui Roman Likvar\") was developed by the Brahui Language Board of the University of Balochistan in Quetta and adopted by the newspaper Tal\u00e1r.\nBelow is the new promoted Br\u00e1hu\u00ed B\u00e1\u015f\u00e1gal Brolikva orthography:\nThe letters with diacritics are the long vowels, post-alveolar and retroflex consonants, the voiced velar fricative and the voiceless lateral fricative.\nEndangerment.\nAccording to a 2009 UNESCO report, Brahui is one of the 27 languages of Pakistan that are facing the danger of extinction. They classify it in \"unsafe\" status, the least endangered level out of the five levels of concern (Unsafe, Definitely Endangered, Severely Endangered, Critically Endangered and Extinct).\nPublications.\nTal\u00e1r is the first daily newspaper in the Brahui language. It uses the new Roman orthography and is \"an attempt to standardize and develop [the] Brahui language to meet the requirements of modern political, social and scientific discourse.\""}
{"id": "4703", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4703", "title": "Bob Dylans Debut", "text": ""}
{"id": "4706", "revid": "6603820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4706", "title": "Berkeley DB", "text": "Berkeley DB (BDB) is a software library intended to provide a high-performance embedded database for key/value data. Berkeley DB is written in C with API bindings for C++, C#, Java, Perl, PHP, Python, Ruby, Smalltalk, Tcl, and many other programming languages. BDB stores arbitrary key/data pairs as byte arrays, and supports multiple data items for a single key. Berkeley DB is not a relational database, although it has advanced database features including database transactions, multiversion concurrency control and write-ahead logging.\nBDB can support thousands of simultaneous threads of control or concurrent processes manipulating databases as large as 256 terabytes, on a wide variety of operating systems including most Unix-like and Windows systems, and real-time operating systems.\nBDB was commercially supported and developed by Sleepycat Software from 1996 to 2006. This company was acquired by Oracle Corporation in February 2006, which continues to develop and sell Berkeley DB products. As of 2020, Bloomberg LP continues to develop a fork of BDB within their Comdb2 database, under the original Sleepycat permissive software license.\nOrigin.\nBerkeley DB originated at the University of California, Berkeley as part of BSD, Berkeley's version of the Unix operating system. After 4.3BSD (1986), the BSD developers attempted to remove or replace all code originating in the original AT&amp;T Unix from which BSD was derived. In doing so, they needed to rewrite the Unix database package. Seltzer and Yigit created a new database, unencumbered by any AT&amp;T patents: an on-disk hash table that outperformed the existing dbm libraries. Berkeley DB itself was first released in 1991 and later included with 4.4BSD. In 1996 Netscape requested that the authors of Berkeley DB improve and extend the library, then at version 1.86, to suit Netscape's requirements for an LDAP server and for use in the Netscape browser. That request led to the creation of Sleepycat Software. This company was acquired by Oracle Corporation in February 2006, which continues to develop and sell Berkeley DB.\nSince its initial release, Berkeley DB has gone through various versions. Each major release cycle has introduced a single new major feature generally layering on top of the earlier features to add functionality to the product. The 1.x releases focused on managing key/value data storage and are referred to as \"Data Store\" (DS). The 2.x releases added a locking system enabling concurrent access to data. This is what is known as \"Concurrent Data Store\" (CDS). The 3.x releases added a logging system for transactions and recovery, called \"Transactional Data Store\" (TDS). The 4.x releases added the ability to replicate log records and create a distributed highly available single-master multi-replica database. This is called the \"High Availability\" (HA) feature set. Berkeley DB's evolution has sometimes led to minor API changes or log format changes, but very rarely have database formats changed. Berkeley DB HA supports online upgrades from one version to the next by maintaining the ability to read and apply the prior release's log records.\nThe FreeBSD and OpenBSD operating systems continue to use Berkeley DB 1.8x for compatibility reasons; Linux-based operating systems commonly include several versions to accommodate for applications still using older interfaces/files.\nStarting with the 6.0.21 (Oracle 12c) release, all Berkeley DB products are licensed under the GNU AGPL. Berkeley DB JE 7.3.7 is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. Previously, Berkeley DB was redistributed under the 4-clause BSD license (before version 2.0), and the Sleepycat Public License, which is an OSI-approved open-source license as well as an FSF-approved free software license. The product ships with complete source code, build script, test suite, and documentation. The code quality and general utility along with the licensing terms have led to its use in a multitude of free and open-source software. Those who do not wish to abide by the terms of the GNU AGPL, or use an older version with the Sleepycat Public License, have the option of purchasing another proprietary license for redistribution from Oracle Corporation. This technique is called dual licensing. Different versions of Berkeley DB (DB, JE, XML) may have different licensing terms.\nBerkeley DB includes compatibility interfaces for some historic Unix database libraries: dbm, ndbm and hsearch (a System V and POSIX library for creating in-memory hash tables).\nArchitecture.\nBerkeley DB has an architecture notably simpler than that of other database systems like relational database management systems. For example, like SQLite, it is not based on a server/client model, and does not provide support for network access programs access the database using in-process API calls. Oracle added support for SQL in 11g R2 release based on the popular SQLite API by including a version of SQLite in Berkeley DB (it uses Berkley DB for storage). There is third party support for PL/SQL in Berkeley DB via a commercial product named Metatranz StepSqlite.\nA program accessing the database is free to decide how the data is to be stored in a record. Berkeley DB puts no constraints on the record's data. The record and its key can both be up to four gigabytes long.\nDespite having a simple architecture, Berkeley DB supports many advanced database features such as ACID transactions, fine-grained locking, hot backups and replication.\nOracle Corporation Editions.\nThe name \"Berkeley DB\" is used by Oracle Corporation for three different products:\nEach edition has separate database libraries, despite the common branding. The first is the traditional Berkeley DB, written in C. It contains several database implementations, including a B-tree and one built around extensible hashing. It supports multiple language bindings, including C/C++, Java (via JNI), C# .NET, Perl and Python.\nBerkeley DB Java Edition (JE) is a pure Java database management library. Its design resembles that of Berkeley DB without replicating it exactly, and has a feature set that includes many of those found in the traditional Berkeley DB and others that are specific to the Java Edition. It has a log structured storage architecture, which gives it different performance and concurrency characteristics. Three APIs are available a Direct Persistence Layer which is \"Plain Old Java Objects\" (POJO); one which is based on the Java Collections Framework (an object persistence approach); and one based on the traditional Berkeley DB API. The Berkeley DB Java Edition High Availability option (Replication) is available. Note that traditional Berkeley DB also supports a Java API, but it does so via JNI and thus requires an installed native library.\nThe Berkeley DB XML database specializes in the storage of XML documents, supporting XQuery via XQilla. It is implemented as an additional layer on top of (a legacy version of) Berkeley DB and the Xerces library. DB XML is written in C++ and supports multiple language bindings, including C++, Java (via JNI), Perl and Python.\nPrograms that use Berkeley DB.\nBerkeley DB provides the underlying storage and retrieval system of several LDAP servers, database systems, and many other proprietary and free/open source applications. Notable software that use Berkeley DB for data storage include:\nLicensing.\nBerkeley DB V2.0 and higher is available under a dual license:\nThe switch to AGPL has caused major GNU/Linux distributions such as Debian to completely phase out their use of Berkeley DB, with a preference for Lightning Memory-Mapped Database (LMDB). The rationale is that having commercial users use AGPL code would be unacceptable, as they would be forced to provide their source code to users by a simple software upgrade."}
