{"id": "10139", "revid": "1108604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10139", "title": "Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford", "text": "Edward de\u00a0Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (; 12 April 155024 June 1604) was an English peer and courtier of the Elizabethan era. Oxford was heir to the second oldest earldom in the kingdom, a court favourite for a time, a sought-after patron of the arts, and noted by his contemporaries as a lyric poet and court playwright, but his volatile temperament precluded him from attaining any courtly or governmental responsibility and contributed to the dissipation of his estate. Since the 1920s, he has been among the most prominent alternative candidates proposed for the authorship of Shakespeare's works.\nOxford was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and Margery Golding. After the death of his father in 1562, he became a ward of Queen Elizabeth and was sent to live in the household of her principal advisor, Sir\u00a0William Cecil. He married Cecil's daughter, Anne, with whom he had five children. Oxford was estranged from her for five years after he refused to acknowledge her first child as his.\nA champion jouster, Oxford travelled widely throughout France and the many states of Italy. He was among the first to compose love poetry at the Elizabethan court, and was praised as a playwright, though none of the plays known as his survive. A stream of dedications praised Oxford for his generous patronage of literary, religious, musical, and medical works, and he patronised both adult and boy acting companies, as well as musicians, tumblers, acrobats and performing animals.\nHe fell out of favour with the Queen in the early 1580s and was exiled from court after impregnating one of her maids of honour, Anne Vavasour, which instigated violent street brawls between Oxford\u2019s retainers and Anne\u2019s uncles. He was reconciled to the Queen in May 1583 at Theobalds, but all opportunities for advancement had been lost. In 1586, the Queen granted Oxford a \u00a31,000 annuity to relieve his financial distress, caused by his extravagance and selling off his income-producing lands for ready money. After the death of his first wife, Anne Cecil, Oxford married Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's maids of honour, with whom he had an heir, Henry de\u00a0Vere. Oxford died in 1604, having spent the entirety of his inherited estates.\nFamily and childhood.\nEdward de\u00a0Vere was born heir to the second oldest earldom in England, at the de\u00a0Vere ancestral home, Hedingham Castle, in Essex, north-east of London. He was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and his second wife, Margery Golding and was probably named to honour Edward VI, from whom he received a gilded christening cup. He had an older half-sister, Katherine, the child of his father's first marriage to Dorothy Neville, and a younger sister, Mary de Vere. Both his parents had established court connections: the 16th Earl accompanying Princess Elizabeth from her house arrest at Hatfield to the throne, and the countess being appointed a maid of honour in 1559.\nBefore his father\u2019s death, Edward de\u00a0Vere was styled Viscount Bulbeck, or Bolebec, and was raised in the Protestant reformed faith. Like many children of the nobility, he was raised by surrogate parents, in his case in the household of Sir\u00a0Thomas Smith. At eight he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, as an \"impubes\", or immature fellow-commoner, later transferring to St\u00a0John's. Thomas Fowle, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, was paid \u00a310 annually as de\u00a0Vere's tutor.\nHis father died on 3 August 1562, shortly after making his will. Because he held lands from the Crown by knight service, his son became a royal ward of the Queen and was placed in the household of Sir\u00a0William Cecil, her secretary of state and chief advisor. At 12, de\u00a0Vere had become the 17th\u00a0Earl of Oxford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and heir to an estate whose annual income, though assessed at approximately \u00a32,500, may have run as high as \u00a33,500 (\u00a3 as of ).\nWardship.\nWhile living at the Cecil House, Oxford\u2019s daily studies consisted of dancing instruction, French, Latin, cosmography, writing exercises, drawing, and common prayers. During his first year at Cecil House, he was briefly tutored by Laurence Nowell, the antiquarian and Anglo-Saxon scholar. In a letter to Cecil, Nowell explains: \"I clearly see that my work for the Earl of Oxford cannot be much longer required\", and his departure after eight\u00a0months has been interpreted as either a sign of the thirteen-year-old Oxford\u2019s intractability as a pupil, or an indication that his precocity surpassed Nowell's ability to instruct him. In May\u00a01564 Arthur Golding, in his dedication to his \"Th' Abridgement of the Histories of Trogus Pompeius\", attributed to his young nephew an interest in ancient history and contemporary events.\nIn 1563, Oxford\u2019s older half-sister, Katherine, then Lady Windsor, challenged the legitimacy of the marriage of de\u00a0Vere's parents in the Ecclesiastical court. His uncle Golding argued that the Archbishop of Canterbury should halt the proceedings, since a proceeding against a ward of the Queen could not be brought without prior licence from the Court of Wards and Liveries.\nSome time before October\u00a01563, Oxford\u2019s mother married secondly Charles Tyrrell, a Gentleman Pensioner. In May\u00a01565 she wrote to Cecil, urging that the money from family properties set aside by Oxford\u2019s father's will for his use during his minority should be entrusted to herself and other family friends, to protect it and to ensure that Oxford would be able to meet the expenses of furnishing his household and suing his livery when he reached his majority; this last would end his wardship, through cancelling his debt with the Court of Wards, and convey to him the powers attached to his titles. There is no evidence that Cecil ever replied to her request. She died three years later, and was buried beside her first husband at Earls Colne. Oxford\u2019s stepfather, Charles Tyrrell, died in March 1570.\nIn August\u00a01564 Oxford was among 17\u00a0noblemen, knights, and esquires in the Queen's entourage who were awarded the honorary degree of Master of Arts by the University of Cambridge, and he was awarded another by the University of Oxford on a Royal progress in 1566. His future father-in-law, William Cecil, also received honorary degrees of Master of Arts on the same progresses. There is no evidence that Oxford ever received a Bachelor of Arts degree. In February\u00a01567 he was admitted to Gray's Inn to study law.\nOn 23 July 1567, while practicing fencing in the backyard of Cecil House in the Strand, the seventeen-year-old Oxford killed Thomas Brincknell, an under-cook in the Cecil household. At the coroner's inquest the next day, the jury, which included Oxford\u2019s servant, and Cecil's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, the future historian Raphael Holinshed, found that Brincknell, drunk, had deliberately committed suicide by running onto Oxford's blade. As a suicide, he was not buried in consecrated ground, and all his worldly possessions were confiscated, leaving his pregnant wife destitute. She delivered a still-born child shortly after Brinknell's death. Cecil later wrote that he attempted to have the jury find that Oxford had acted in self defence.\nRecords of books purchased for Oxford in 1569 attest to his continued interest in history, as well as literature and philosophy. Among them were editions of a gilt Geneva Bible, Chaucer, Plutarch, two books in Italian, and folio editions of Cicero and Plato. In the same year Thomas Underdown dedicated his translation of the \"\u00c6thiopian History\" of Heliodorus to Oxford, praising his 'haughty courage', 'great skill' and 'sufficiency of learning'. In the winter of 1570, Oxford made the acquaintance of the mathematician and astrologer John Dee and became interested in occultism, studying magic and conjuring.\nIn 1569, Oxford received his first vote for membership in the Order of the Garter, but never attained the honour in spite of his high rank and office. In November of that year, Oxford petitioned Cecil for a foreign military posting. Although the Roman Catholic Revolt of the Northern Earls had broken out that year, Elizabeth refused to grant the request. Cecil eventually obtained a position for Oxford under the Earl of Sussex in a Scottish campaign the following spring. He and Sussex became staunch mutual supporters at court.\nComing of age.\nOn 12 April 1571, Oxford attained his majority and took his seat in the House of Lords. Great expectations attended his coming of age; Sir\u00a0George Buck recalled predictions that 'he was much more like ... to acquire a new erldome then to wast &amp; lose an old erldom', a prophecy that was never fulfilled.\nAlthough formal certification of his freedom from Burghley's control was deferred until May\u00a01572, Oxford was finally granted the income of \u00a3666 which his father had intended him to have earlier, but properties set aside to pay his father's debts would not come his way for another decade. During his minority as the Queen's ward, one third of his estate had already reverted to the Crown, much of which Elizabeth had long since settled on Robert Dudley. Elizabeth demanded a further payment of \u00a33,000 for overseeing the wardship and a further \u00a34,000 for suing his livery. Oxford pledged double the amount if he failed to pay when it fell due, effectively risking a total obligation of \u00a321,000.\nBy 1571, Oxford was a court favourite of Elizabeth's. In May, he participated in the three-day tilt, tourney and barrier, at which although he did not win he was given chief honours in celebration of the attainment of his majority, his prowess winning admiring comments from spectators. In August, Oxford attended Paul de Foix, who had come to England to negotiate a marriage between Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the future King\u00a0Henry III of France. His published poetry dates from this period and, along with Edward Dyer he was one of the first courtiers to introduce vernacular verse to the court.\nMarriage.\nIn 1562, the 16th Earl of Oxford had contracted with Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon, for his son Edward to marry one of Huntingdon's sisters; when he reached the age of eighteen, he was to choose either Elizabeth or Mary Hastings. However, after the death of the 16th Earl, the indenture was allowed to lapse. Elizabeth Hastings later married Edward Somerset, while Mary Hastings died unmarried.\nIn the summer of 1571, Oxford declared an interest in Cecil's 14\u00a0year-old daughter, Anne, and received the queen's consent to the marriage. Anne had been pledged to Philip Sidney two years earlier, but after a year of negotiations Sidney's father, Sir Henry, was declining in the Queen's favour and Cecil suspected financial difficulties. In addition, Cecil had been elevated to the peerage as Lord Burghley in February\u00a01571, thus elevating his daughter's rank, so the negotiations were cancelled. Cecil was displeased with the arrangement, given his daughter's age compared to Oxford\u2019s, and had entertained the idea of marrying her to the Earl of Rutland instead. The marriage was deferred until Anne was fifteen and finally took place at the Palace of Whitehall on 16 December 1571, in a triple wedding with that of Lady\u00a0Elizabeth Hastings and Edward Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Edward Sutton, 4th Baron Dudley and bride, Mary Howard, with the Queen in attendance. The tying of two young English noblemen of great fortune into Protestant families was not lost on Elizabeth's Catholic enemies. Burghley gave Oxford for his daughter\u2019s dowry land worth \u00a3800, and a cash settlement of \u00a33,000. This amount was equal to Oxford\u2019s livery fees and was probably intended to be used as such, but the money vanished without a trace.\nOxford assigned Anne a jointure of some \u00a3669, but even though he was of age and a married man, he was still not in possession of his inheritance. After finally paying the Crown the \u00a34,000 it demanded for his livery, he was finally licensed to enter on his lands in May 1572. He was entitled to yearly revenues from his estates and the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of approximately \u00a32,250, but he was not entitled to the income from his mother's jointure until after her death, nor to the income from certain estates set aside until 1583 to pay his father's debts. In addition, the fines assessed against Oxford in the Court of Wards for his wardship, marriage, and livery already totalled some \u00a33,306. To guarantee payment, he entered into bonds to the Court totalling \u00a311,000, and two further private bonds for \u00a36,000 apiece.\nIn 1572, Oxford's first cousin and closest relative, the Duke of Norfolk, was found guilty of a Catholic conspiracy against Elizabeth and was executed for treason. Oxford had earlier petitioned both the Queen and Burghley on the condemned Norfolk's behalf, to no avail, and it was claimed in a \"murky petition from an unidentified woman\" that he had plotted to provide a ship to assist his cousin's escape attempt to Spain.\nThe following summer, Oxford planned to travel to Ireland; at this point, his debts were estimated at a minimum of \u00a36,000.\nIn the summer of 1574, Elizabeth admonished Oxford \"for his unthriftyness\", and on 1 July he bolted to the continent without permission, travelling to Calais with Lord Edward Seymour, and then to Flanders, \"carrying a great sum of money with him\". Coming as it did during a time of expected hostilities with Spain, Mary, Queen of Scots, interpreted his flight as an indication of his Catholic sympathies, as did the Catholic rebels then living on the continent. Burghley, however, assured the queen that Oxford was loyal, and she sent two Gentlemen Pensioners to summon him back, under threat of heavy penalties. Oxford returned to England by the end of the month and was in London on the 28th. His request for a place on the Privy Council was rejected, but the queen's anger was abated and she promised him a licence to travel to Paris, Germany, and Italy on his pledge of good behaviour.\nForeign travel.\nElizabeth issued Oxford a licence to travel in January\u00a01575, and provided him with letters of introduction to foreign monarchs. Prior to his departure, Oxford entered into two indentures. In the first contract, he sold his manors in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire to three trustees for \u00a36,000. In the second, since he had no heirs, and if he should die abroad the estates would pass to his sister, Mary, he entailed the lands of the earldom on his first cousin, Hugh Vere. The indenture also provided for payment of debts amounting to \u00a39,096, \u00a33,457 of which was still owed to the Queen as expenses for his wardship.\nOxford left England in the first week of February 1575, and a month later was presented to the King and Queen of France. News that Anne was pregnant had reached him in Paris, and he sent her many extravagant presents in the coming months. But somewhere along the way his mind was poisoned against Anne and the Cecils, and he became convinced that the expected child was not his. The elder Cecils loudly voiced their outrage at the rumours, which probably worsened the situation. In mid-March he travelled to Strasbourg, and then made his way to Venice, via Milan. Although his daughter, Elizabeth, was born at the beginning of July, for unexplained reasons Oxford did not learn of her birth until late September.\nOxford remained in Italy for a year, during which he was evidently captivated by Italian fashions in clothing, jewellery and cosmetics. He is recorded by John Stow as having introduced various Italian luxury items to the English court which immediately became fashionable, such as embroidered or trimmed scented gloves. Elizabeth had a pair of decorated gloves scented with perfume that for many years was known as the \"Earl of Oxford's perfume\". Lacking evidence, his interest in higher Italian culture, its literature, music and visual art, is less sure. His only recorded judgement about the country itself was unenthusiastic. In a letter to Burghley he wrote, \".\"\nIn January\u00a01576 Oxford wrote to Lord Burghley from Siena about complaints that had reached him about his creditors' demands, which included the Queen and his sister, and directing that more of his land be sold to pay them. He left Venice in March, intending to return home by way of Lyons and Paris; although one later report has him as far south as Palermo in Sicily. At this point the Italian financier Benedict Spinola had lent Oxford over \u00a34,000 for his 15-month-long continental tour, while in England over a hundred tradesmen were seeking settlement of debts totalling thousands of pounds.\nOn Oxford's return across the Channel in April 1576, his ship was seized by pirates from Flushing, who took his possessions, stripped him to his shirt, and might have murdered him had not one of them recognized him.\nOn his return, Oxford refused to live with his wife and took rooms at Charing Cross. Aside from the unspoken suspicion that Elizabeth was not his child, Burghley's papers reveal a flood of bitter complaints by Oxford against the Cecil family. Upon the Queen's request, he allowed his wife to attend the Queen at court, but only when he was not present, and he insisted that she not attempt to speak to him. He also stipulated that Burghley must make no further appeals to him on Anne's behalf. He was estranged from Anne for five\u00a0years.\nIn February\u00a01577 it was rumoured that Oxford's sister Mary would marry Lord Gerald Fitzgerald (1559\u20131580), but by 2 July her name was linked with that of Peregrine Bertie, later Lord Willoughby d'Eresby. Bertie's mother, the Duchess of Suffolk, wrote to Lord Burghley that \"my wise son has gone very far with my Lady Mary Vere, I fear too far to turn\". Both the Duchess and her husband Richard Bertie first opposed the marriage, and the Queen initially withheld her consent. Oxford's own opposition to the match was so vehement that for some time Mary's prospective husband feared for his life. On 15 December the Duchess of Suffolk wrote to Burghley describing a plan she and Mary had devised to arrange a meeting between Oxford and his daughter. Whether the scheme came to fruition is unknown. Mary and Bertie were married sometime before March of the following year.\nQuarrels, plots and scandals.\nOxford had sold his inherited lands in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire prior to his continental tour. On his return to England in 1576 he sold his manors in Devonshire; by the end of 1578 he had sold at least seven more.\nIn 1577 Oxford invested \u00a325 in the second of Martin Frobisher's expeditions in search of the Northwest Passage. In July\u00a01577, he asked the Crown for the grant of Castle Rising, which had been forfeited to the Crown due to his cousin Norfolk's attainder in 1572. As soon as it was granted to him, he sold it, along with two other manors, and sank some \u00a33,000 into Frobisher's third expedition. The 'gold' ore brought back turned out to be worthless, and Oxford lost the entire investment.\nIn the summer of 1578, Oxford attended the Queen's progress through East Anglia. The royal party stayed at Lord Henry Howard's residence at Audley End. A contretemps occurred during the progress in mid-August when the Queen twice asked Oxford to dance before the French ambassadors, who were in England to negotiate a marriage between the 46-year-old English queen and the younger brother of Henri\u00a0III of France, the 24\u00a0year-old Duke of Anjou. Oxford refused, on the grounds that he \"would not give pleasure to Frenchmen\".\nIn April 1578, the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de\u00a0Mendoza, had written to King\u00a0Philip II of Spain that it had been proposed that if Anjou were to travel to England to negotiate his marriage to the Queen, Oxford, Surrey, and Windsor should be hostages for his safe return. Anjou himself did not arrive in England until the end of August, but his ambassadors were already in England. Oxford was sympathetic to the proposed marriage; Leicester and his nephew Philip Sidney were adamantly opposed to it. This antagonism may have triggered the famous quarrel between Oxford and Sidney on the tennis court at Whitehall. It is not entirely clear who was playing on the court when the fight erupted; what is undisputed is that Oxford called Sidney a 'puppy', while Sidney responded that \"all the world knows puppies are gotten by dogs, and children by men\". The French ambassadors, whose private galleries overlooked the tennis court, were witness to the display. Whether it was Sidney who next challenged Oxford to a duel or the other way around, the matter was not taken further, and the Queen personally took Sidney to task for not recognizing the difference between his status and Oxford's. Christopher Hatton and Sidney's friend Hubert Languet also tried to dissuade Sidney from pursuing the matter, and it was eventually dropped. The specific cause is not known, but in January\u00a01580 Oxford wrote and challenged Sidney; by the end of the month Oxford was confined by the Queen to his chambers, and was not released until early February.\nOxford openly quarrelled with the Earl of Leicester at about this time; he was confined to his chamber at Greenwich for some time 'about the libelling between him and my Lord of Leicester'. In the summer of 1580, Gabriel Harvey, apparently motivated by a desire to ingratiate himself with Leicester, satirized Oxford's love for things Italian in verses entitled \"Speculum Tuscanismi\" and in \"Three Proper and Witty Familiar Letters\".\nAlthough details are unclear, there is evidence that in 1577 Oxford attempted to leave England to see service in the French Wars of Religion on the side of King\u00a0Henry III. Like many members of older established aristocratic families in England, he inclined to Roman Catholicism; and after his return from Italy, he was reported to have embraced the religion, perhaps after a distant kinsman, Charles Arundell, introduced him to a seminary priest named Richard Stephens. But just as quickly, by late in 1580 he had denounced a group of Catholics, among them Arundell, Francis Southwell, and Henry Howard, for treasonous activities and asking the Queen's mercy for his own, now repudiated, Catholicism. Elizabeth characteristically delayed in acting on the matter and Oxford was detained under house arrest for a short time.\nLeicester is credited by Nelson with having \"dislodged Oxford from the pro-French group\", i.e., the group at court which favoured Elizabeth's marriage to the Duke of Anjou. The Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, was also of the view that Leicester was behind Oxford's informing on his fellow Catholics in an attempt to prevent the French marriage. Peck concurs, stating that Leicester was \"intent upon rendering Sussex's allies politically useless\".\nThe Privy Council ordered the arrest of both Howard and Arundell; Oxford immediately met secretly with Arundell to convince him to support his allegations against Howard and Southwell, offering him money and a pardon from the Queen. Arundell refused this offer, and he and Howard initially sought asylum with Mendoza. Only after being assured that they would be placed under house arrest in the home of a Privy Councillor, did the pair give themselves up. During the first weeks after their arrest they pursued a threefold strategy: they would admit to minor crimes, prove Oxford a liar by his offers of money to testify to his accusations, and demonstrate that their accuser posed the real danger to the Crown. The extensive list of allegations to discredit Oxford included atheism, lying, heresy, disobedience to the crown, treason, murder for hire, sexual perversion, and pederasty with his English and Italian servants (\"buggering a boy that is his cook and many other boys\"), habitual drunkenness, vowing to murder various courtiers, and declaring that Elizabeth had a bad singing voice.\nArundell and Howard cleared themselves of Oxford's accusations, although Howard remained under house arrest into August, while Arundell was not freed until October or November. None of the three was ever indicted or tried. In the meantime, Oxford was at liberty, and won a tournament at Westminster on 22 January. His page's speech at the tournament, describing Oxford's appearance as the Knight of the Tree of the Sun, was published in 1592 in a pamphlet entitled \"Plato, Axiochus\".\nOn 14 April 1589 Oxford was among the peers who found Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, the eldest son and heir of Oxford's cousin, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, guilty of treason; Arundel later died in prison. Oxford later insisted that \"the Howards were the most treacherous race under heaven\" and that \"my Lord Howard [was] the worst villain that lived in this earth.\"\nDuring the early 1580s it is likely that the Earl of Oxford lived mainly at one of his Essex country houses, Wivenhoe, which was sold in 1584. In June\u00a01580 he purchased a tenement and seven acres of land near Aldgate in London from the Italian merchant Benedict Spinola for \u00a32,500. The property, located in the parish of St\u00a0Botolphs, was known as the Great Garden of Christchurch and had formerly belonged to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He also purchased a London residence, a mansion in Bishopsgate known as Fisher's Folly. According to Henry Howard, Oxford paid a large sum for the property and renovations to it.\nOxford's triumph was short-lived. On 23 March 1581 Sir Francis Walsingham advised the Earl of Huntingdon that two\u00a0days earlier Anne Vavasour, one of the Queen's maids of honour, had given birth to a son, and that \"the Earl of Oxford is avowed to be the father, who hath withdrawn himself with intent, as it is thought, to pass the seas\". Oxford was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London, as was Anne and her infant, who would later be known as Sir\u00a0Edward Vere. Burghley interceded for Oxford, and he was released from the Tower on 8 June, but he remained under house arrest until some time in July.\nWhile Oxford was under house arrest in May, Thomas Stocker dedicated to him his \"Divers Sermons of Master John Calvin\", stating in the dedication that he had been \"brought up in your Lordship's father's house\". \nOxford was still under house arrest in mid-July, but took part in an Accession Day tournament at Whitehall on 17 November 1581. He was then banished from court until June\u00a01583. He appealed to Burghley to intervene with the Queen on his behalf, but his father-in-law repeatedly put the matter in the hands of Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton. \nAt Christmas 1581, Oxford was reconciled with his wife, Anne, but his affair with Anne Vavasour continued to have repercussions. In March\u00a01582 there was a skirmish in the streets of London between Oxford and Anne's uncle, Sir\u00a0Thomas Knyvet. Oxford was wounded, and his servant killed; reports conflict as to whether Kynvet was also injured. There was another fray between Knyvet's and Oxford's retinues on 18 June, and a third six\u00a0days later, when it was reported that Knyvet had \"slain a man of the Earl of Oxford's in fight\". In a letter to Burghley three\u00a0years later Oxford offered to attend his father-in-law at his house \"as well as a lame man might\"; it is possible his lameness was a result of injuries from that encounter. On 19 January 1585 Anne Vavasour's brother Thomas sent Oxford a written challenge; it appears to have been ignored.\nMeanwhile, the street-brawling between factions continued. Another of Oxford's men was killed in January, and in March Burghley wrote to Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton about the death of one of Knyvet's men, thanking Hatton for his efforts \"to bring some good end to these troublesome matters betwixt my Lord Oxford and Mr\u00a0Thomas Knyvet\".\nOn 6 May 1583, eighteen months after their reconciliation, Edward and Anne's only son was born, but died the same day. The infant was buried at Castle Hedingham three\u00a0days later.\nAfter intervention by Burghley and Sir Walter Raleigh, Oxford was reconciled to the Queen, and his two-year exile from court ended at the end of May on condition of his guarantee of good behaviour. However, he never regained his position as a courtier of the first magnitude.\nTheatrical enterprises.\nThe previous Earl of Oxford had maintained a company of players known as Oxford's Men, which was discontinued by the 17th Earl two\u00a0years after his father's death. Beginning in 1580, Oxford patronised both adult and boy companies and a company of musicians, and also sponsored performances by tumblers, acrobats, and performing animals. The new Oxford's Men toured the provinces between 1580 and 1587. Sometime after November\u00a01583, Oxford bought a sublease of the premises used by the boy companies in the Blackfriars, and then gave it to his secretary, the writer John Lyly. Lyly installed Henry Evans, a Welsh scrivener and theatrical affectionado, as the manager of the new company of Oxford's Boys, composed of the Children of the Chapel and the Children of Paul's, and turned his talents to play writing until the end of June\u00a01584, when the original playhouse lease was voided by its owner. In 1584\u20131585, \"the Earl of Oxford's musicians\" received payments for performances in the cities of Oxford and Barnstaple. Oxford's Men (also known as Oxford's Players) stayed active until 1602.\nRoyal annuity.\nOn 6 April 1584, Oxford's daughter Bridget was born, and two works were dedicated to him, Robert Greene's \"Gwydonius; The Card of Fancy\", and John Southern's \"Pandora\". Verses in the latter work mention Oxford's knowledge of astronomy, history, languages, and music.\nOxford's financial situation was steadily deteriorating. At this point, he had sold almost all his inherited lands, which cut him off from what had been his principal source of income. Moreover, because the properties were security for his unpaid debt to the Queen in the Court of Wards, he had had to enter into a bond with the purchaser, guaranteeing that he would indemnify them if the Queen were to make a claim against the lands to collect on the debt. To avoid this eventuality, the purchasers of his estates agreed to pay Oxford's debt to the Court of Wards in instalments.\nIn 1585 negotiations were underway for King\u00a0James VI of Scotland to come to England to discuss the release of his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, and in March Oxford was to be sent to Scotland as one of the hostages for James's safety.\nIn 1586, Oxford petitioned the Queen for an annuity to relieve his distressed financial situation. His father-in-law made him several large loans, and Elizabeth granted him a \u00a31,000 annuity, to be continued at her pleasure or until he could be provided for otherwise. This annuity was later continued by James\u00a0I. De\u00a0Vere's widow, Elizabeth, petitioned James\u00a0I for an annuity of \u00a3250 on behalf of her 11-year-old son, Henry, to continue the \u00a31,000 annuity granted to de\u00a0Vere. Henry ultimately was awarded a \u00a3200 annuity for life. James I would continue the grant after her death.\nAnother daughter, Susan, was born on 26 May 1587. On 12 September, another daughter, Frances, is recorded as buried at Edmonton. Her birthdate is unknown; presumably she was between one and three years of age.\nIn July Elizabeth granted the Earl property which had been seized from Edward Jones, who had been executed for his role in the Babington Plot. In order to protect the land from Oxford's creditors, the grant was made in the name of two trustees. At the end of November it was agreed that the purchasers of Oxford's lands would pay his entire debt of some \u00a33,306 due to the Court of Wards over a five-year period, finishing in 1592.\nIn July and August\u00a01588 England was threatened by the Spanish Armada. On 28 July Leicester, who was in overall command of the English land troops, asked for instructions regarding Oxford, stating that \"he seems most willing to hazard his life in this quarrel\". The Earl was offered the governorship of the port of Harwich, but he thought it was unworthy and declined the post; Leicester was glad to be rid of him.\nIn December\u00a01588 Oxford had secretly sold his London mansion \"Fisher's Folly\" to Sir\u00a0William Cornwallis; by January\u00a01591 the author Thomas Churchyard was dealing with rent owing for rooms he had taken in a house on behalf of his patron. Oxford wrote to Burghley outlining a plan to purchase the manorial lands of Denbigh, in Wales, if the Queen would consent, offering to pay for them by commuting his \u00a31,000 annuity and agreeing to abandon his suit to regain the Forest of Essex (Waltham Forest), and to deed over his interests in Hedingham and Brets for the use of his children, who were living with Burghley under his guardianship.\nIn the spring of 1591 the plan for the purchasers of his land to discharge his debt to the Court of Wards was disrupted by the Queen's taking extents, or writs allowing a creditor to temporarily seize a debtor's property. Oxford complained that his servant Thomas Hampton had taken advantage of these writs by taking money from the tenants to his own use, and had also conspired with another of his servants to pass a fraudulent document under the Great Seal of England. The Lord Mayor, Thomas Skinner, was also involved. In June, Oxford wrote to Burghley reminding him that he had made an agreement with Elizabeth to relinquish his claim to the Forest of Essex for three reasons, one of which was the Queen's reluctance to punish Skinner's felony, which had caused Oxford to forfeit \u00a320,000 in bonds and statutes.\nIn 1586 Angel Day dedicated \"The English Secretary\", the first epistolary manual for writing model letters in English, to Oxford, and William Webbe praised him as \"most excellent among the rest\" of our poets in his \"Discourse of English Poetry\". In 1588 Anthony Munday dedicated to Oxford the two parts of his \"Palmerin d'Oliva\". The following year \"The Arte of English Poesie\", attributed to George Puttenham, placed Oxford among a \"crew\" of courtier poets; Puttenham also considered him among the best comic playwrights of the day. In 1590 Edmund Spenser addressed to Oxford the third of seventeen dedicatory sonnets which preface \"The Faerie Queene\", celebrating his patronage of poets. The composer John Farmer, who was in Oxford's service at the time, dedicated \"The First Set of Divers &amp; Sundry Ways of Two Parts in One\" to him in 1591, noting in the dedication his patron's love of music.\nRemarriage and later life.\nOn 5 June 1588 Oxford's wife Anne Cecil died at court of a fever; she was 31.\nOn 4 July 1591 Oxford sold the Great Garden property at Aldgate to John Wolley and Francis Trentham. The arrangement was stated to be for the benefit of Francis's sister, Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's Maids of Honour, whom Oxford married later that year. On 24 February 1593, at Stoke Newington, she gave birth to his only surviving son, Henry de\u00a0Vere, who was his heir.\nBetween 1591 and 1592 Oxford disposed of the last of his large estates; Castle Hedingham, the seat of his earldom, went to Lord Burghley, it was held in trust for Oxford's three daughters by his first marriage. He commissioned his servant, Roger Harlakenden, to sell Colne Priory. Harlekenden contrived to undervalue the land, then purchase it (as well as other parcels that were not meant to be sold) under his son's name; the suits Oxford brought against Harlakenden for fraud dragged out for decades and were never settled in his lifetime.\nProtracted negotiations to arrange a match between his daughter Elizabeth and Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, did not result in marriage; on 19 November 1594, six\u00a0weeks after Southampton turned 21, 'the young Earl of Southampton, refusing the Lady\u00a0Vere, payeth \u00a35000 of present money'. In January Elizabeth married William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Derby had promised Oxford his new bride would have \u00a31,000 a year, but the financial provision for her was slow in materializing.\nHis father-in-law, Lord\u00a0Burghley, died on 4 August 1598 at the age of 78, leaving substantial bequests to Oxford's two unmarried daughters, Bridget and Susan. The bequests were structured to prevent Oxford from gaining control of his daughters' inheritances by assuming custody of them.\nEarlier negotiations for a marriage to William Herbert having fallen through, in May or June\u00a01599 Oxford's 15\u00a0year-old daughter Bridget married Francis Norris. Susan married Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.\nFrom March to August\u00a01595 Oxford actively importuned the Queen, in competition with Lord Buckhurst, to farm the tin mines in Cornwall. He wrote to Burghley, enumerating years of fruitless attempts to amend his financial situation and complained: 'This last year past I have been a suitor to her Majesty that I might farm her tins, giving \u00a33000 a year more than she had made.' Oxford's letters and memoranda indicate that he pursued his suit into 1596, and renewed it again three\u00a0years later, but was ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining the tin monopoly.\nIn October\u00a01595, Oxford wrote to his brother in law, Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil, of friction between himself and the ill-fated Earl of Essex, partly over his claim to property, terming him 'the only person that I dare rely upon in the court'. Cecil seems to have done little to further Oxford's interests in the suit.\nIn March he was unable to go to court due to illness, in August he wrote to Burghley from Byfleet, where he had gone for his health: 'I find comfort in this air, but no fortune in the court.' In September, he again wrote of ill health, regretting he had not been able to pay attendance to the Queen. Two\u00a0months later Rowland Whyte wrote to Sir\u00a0Robert Sidney that 'Some say my Lord of Oxford is dead'. Whether the rumour of his death was related to the illness mentioned in his letters earlier in the year is unknown. Oxford attended his last Parliament in December, perhaps another indication of his failing health.\nOn 28 April 1599 Oxford was sued by the widow of his tailor for a debt of \u00a3500 for services rendered some two decades earlier. He claimed that not only had he paid the debt, but that the tailor had absconded with 'cloth of gold and silver and other stuff' belonging to him, worth \u00a3800. The outcome of the suit is unknown.\nIn July\u00a01600 Oxford wrote requesting Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil's help in securing an appointment as Governor of the Isle of Jersey, once again citing the Queen's unfulfilled promises to him. In February he again wrote for his support, this time for the office of President of Wales. As with his former suits, Oxford was again unsuccessful; during this time he was listed on the Pipe rolls as owing \u00a320 for the subsidy.\nAfter the abortive Essex rebellion in February\u00a01601, Oxford was 'the senior of the twenty-five noblemen' who rendered verdicts at the trials of Essex and Southampton for treason. After Essex's co-conspirator Sir Charles Danvers was executed on in March, Oxford became a party to a complicated suit regarding lands which had reverted to the Crown by escheat at Danvers's attainder, a suit opposed by Danvers's kinsmen. De\u00a0Vere continued to suffer from ill health, which kept him from court. On 4 December, Oxford was shocked that Cecil, who had encouraged him to undertake the Danvers suit on the Crown's behalf, had now withdrawn his support for it. As with all his other suits aimed at improving his financial situation, this last of Oxford\u2019s suits to the Queen ended in disappointment.\nLast years.\nIn the early morning of 24 March 1603, Queen Elizabeth died without naming a successor. A few days beforehand, at his house at Hackney, Oxford had entertained the Earl of Lincoln, a nobleman known for erratic and violent behaviour similar to his host's. Lincoln reported that after dinner Oxford spoke of the Queen's impending death, claiming that the peers of England should decide the succession, and suggested that since Lincoln had 'a nephew of the blood royal ... Lord\u00a0Hastings', he should be sent to France to find allies to support this claim. Lincoln relayed this conversation to Sir John Peyton, Lieutenant of the Tower, who, knowing how physically and financially infirm Oxford was, refused to take Lincoln's report as a serious threat to King\u00a0James's accession.\nOxford expressed his grief at the late Queen's death, and his apprehension for the future. These fears were unfounded; in letters to Cecil in May and June\u00a01603 he again pressed his decades-long claim to have Waltham Forest (Forest of Essex) and the house and park of Havering restored to him, and on 18 July the new King granted his suit. On 25 July, Oxford was among those who officiated at the King's coronation, and a month later James confirmed his annuity of \u00a31,000.\nOn 18 June 1604, Oxford granted the custody of the Forest of Essex to his son-in-law Lord Norris and his cousin, Sir Francis Vere. He died six\u00a0days later, of unknown causes, at King's Place, Hackney, and was buried on 6 July in the parish church of St.\u00a0Augustine. In spite of his bouts of ill health, he left no will. Elizabeth's will requested that she be buried with her husband at Hackney. Although this document and the parish registers confirm Oxford's burial there, his cousin Percival Golding later claimed that his body was interred at Westminster.\nLiterary reputation.\nOxford's manuscript verses circulated widely in courtly circles. Three of his poems, , , and , are among the texts that repeatedly appear in the surviving 16th century manuscript miscellanies and poetical anthologies. His earliest published poem was in Thomas Bedingfield's translation of Cardano's \"Comforte\" (1573). Bedingfield's dedication to Oxford is dated 1 January 1572. In addition to his poem, Oxford also contributed a commendatory letter setting forth the reasons why Bedingfield should publish the work. In 1576 eight of his poems were published in the poetry miscellany \"The Paradise of Dainty Devises\". According to the introduction, all the poems in the collection were meant to be sung, but Oxford's were almost the only genuine love songs in the collection. Oxford's was published in \"The Phoenix Nest\" (1593) and republished in \"England's Helicon\" (1600). appeared in \"The Teares of Fancie\" (1593). \"Brittons Bowre of Delight\" (1597) published under Oxford's name, but the attribution today is not considered certain.\nContemporary critics praised Oxford as a poet and a playwright. William Webbe names him as \"the most excellent\" of Elizabeth's courtier poets. Puttenham's \"The Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), places him first on a list of courtier poets and includes an excerpt from \"When wert thou born desire\" as an example of \"his excellance and wit\". Puttenham also says that \"highest praise\" should be given to Oxford and Richard Edwardes for \"Comedy and Enterlude\". Francis Meres' \"Palladis Tamia\" (1598) names Oxford first of 17\u00a0playwrights listed by rank who are \"the best for comedy amongst us\", and he also appears first on a list of seven Elizabethan courtly poets \"who honoured Poesie with their pens and practice\" in Henry Peacham's 1622 \"The Compleat Gentleman\".\nSteven W. May writes that the Earl of Oxford was Elizabeth's \"first truly prestigious courtier poet ... [whose] precedent did at least confer genuine respectability upon the later efforts of such poets as Sidney, Greville, and Raleigh.\" He describes de\u00a0Vere as a \"competent, fairly experimental poet working in the established modes of mid-century lyric verse\" and his poetry as \"examples of the standard varieties of mid-Elizabethan amorous lyric\". May says that Oxford's youthful love lyrics, which have been described as experimental and innovative, \"create a dramatic break with everything known to have been written at the Elizabethan court up to that time\" by virtue of being lighter in tone and metre and more imaginative and free from the moralizing tone of the courtier poetry of the \"drab\" age, which tended to be occasional and instructive. and describes one poem, in which the author cries out against \"this loss of my good name\", as a \"defiant lyric without precedent in English Renaissance verse\".\n May says that Oxford's poetry was \"one man's contribution to the rhetorical mainstream of an evolving Elizabethan poetic\" indistinguishable from \"the output of his mediocre mid-century contemporaries\". However, C. S. Lewis wrote that his poetry shows \"a faint talent\", but is \"for the most part undistinguished and verbose.\" Nelson says that \"contemporary observers such as Harvey, Webbe, Puttenham, and Meres clearly exaggerated de\u00a0Vere's talent in deference to his rank. By any measure, his poems pale in comparison with those of Sidney, Lyly, Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, and Jonson.\" He says that his known poems are \"astonishingly uneven\" in quality, ranging from the \"fine\" to the \"execrable\".\nOxford was sought after for his literary and theatrical patronage; between 1564 and 1599, twenty-right works were dedicated to him by authors, including Arthur Golding, John Lyly, Robert Greene, and Anthony Munday. Of his 33\u00a0dedications, 13\u00a0appeared in original or translated works of literature, a higher percentage of literary works than other patrons of similar means. His lifelong patronage of writers, musicians, and actors prompted May to term Oxford \"a nobleman with extraordinary intellectual interests and commitments\", whose biography exhibits a \"lifelong devotion to learning\". He goes on to say that \"Oxford's genuine commitment to learning throughout his career lends a necessary qualification to Stone's conclusion that de\u00a0Vere simply squandered the more than 70,000\u00a0pounds he derived from selling off his patrimony ... for which some part of this amount de\u00a0Vere acquired a splendid reputation for nurture of the arts and sciences\".\nOxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship.\nThe Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship proposes that the Earl of Oxford wrote the plays and poems traditionally attributed to William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon. Though rejected by nearly all academic Shakespeareans, it has been among the most popular alternative Shakespeare authorship theories since the 1920s.\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "10141", "revid": "40943291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10141", "title": "Erinyes", "text": "The Erinyes (; sing. Erinys , ; , pl. of , \"Erinys\"), also known as the Furies, were female chthonic deities of vengeance in ancient Greek religion and mythology. A formulaic oath in the \"Iliad\" invokes them as \"the Erinyes, that under earth take vengeance on men, whosoever hath sworn a false oath\". Walter Burkert suggests they are \"an embodiment of the act of self-cursing contained in the oath\". They correspond to the Dirae in Roman mythology. The Roman writer Maurus Servius Honoratus wrote (ca. 600 AD) that they are called \"Eumenides\" in hell, \"Furiae\" on earth, and \"Dirae\" in heaven.\nAccording to Hesiod's \"Theogony\", when the Titan Cronus castrated his father, Uranus, and threw his genitalia into the sea, the Erinyes (along with the Giants and the Meliae) emerged from the drops of blood which fell on the earth (Gaia), while Aphrodite was born from the crests of sea foam. According to variant accounts, they emerged from an even more primordial level\u2014from Nyx (\"Night\"), or from a union between air and mother earth, in Virgil's \"Aeneid\", they are daughters of Pluto (Hades) and Nox (Nyx). Their number is usually left indeterminate. Virgil, probably working from an Alexandrian source, recognized three: Alecto or Alekto (\"endless anger\"), Megaera (\"jealous rage\"), and Tisiphone or Tilphousia (\"vengeful destruction\"), all of whom appear in the \"Aeneid\". Dante Alighieri followed Virgil in depicting the same three-character triptych of Erinyes; in Canto IX of the \"Inferno\" they confront the poets at the gates of the city of Dis. Whilst the Erinyes were usually described as three maiden goddesses, the Erinys Telphousia was usually a by-name for the wrathful goddess Demeter, who was worshipped under the title of Erinys in the Arkadian town of Thelpousa.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Erinyes\" is of uncertain etymology; connections with the verb \u1f40\u03c1\u03af\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \"orinein\", \"to raise, stir, excite\", and the noun \u1f14\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2 \"eris\", \"strife\" have been suggested; Beekes, pp.\u00a0458\u2013459, has proposed a Pre-Greek origin. The word \"Erinys\" in the singular and as a theonym is first attested in Mycenaean Greek, written in Linear B, in the following forms: , \"e-ri-nu\", and , \"e-ri-nu-we\". These words are found on the KN Fp 1, KN V 52, and KN Fh 390 tablets.\nDescription.\nThe Erinyes live in Erebus and are more ancient than any of the Olympian deities. Their task is to hear complaints brought by mortals against the insolence of the young to the aged, of children to parents, of hosts to guests, and of householders or city councils to suppliants\u2014and to punish such crimes by hounding culprits relentlessly. The Erinyes are crones and, depending upon authors, described as having snakes for hair, dog's heads, coal black bodies, bat's wings, and blood-shot eyes. In their hands they carry brass-studded scourges, and their victims die in torment.\nThree sisters.\nAccording to Hesiod, the Furies sprang forth from the spilled blood of Uranus when he was castrated by his son Cronus. According to Aeschylus' \"Oresteia\", they are the daughters of Nyx, in Virgil's version, they are daughters of Pluto and Nox. In some accounts, they were the daughters of Euonym\u00e8 (a name for Earth) and Cronus, or of Earth and Phorkys (i.e. the sea)\nThe sisters are:\nCult.\nPausanias describe a sanctuary in Athens dedicated to the Erinyes under the name Semnai:\nHard by [the Areopagos the murder court of Athens] is a sanctuary of the goddesses which the Athenians call the August, but Hesiod in the Theogony calls them Erinyes (Furies). It was Aeschylus who first represented them with snakes in their hair. But on the images neither of these nor of any of the under-world deities is there anything terrible. There are images of Pluto, Hermes, and Earth, by which sacrifice those who have received an acquittal on the Hill of Ares; sacrifices are also offered on other occasions by both citizens and aliens.\nIn ancient Greek literature.\nMyth fragments dealing with the Erinyes are found among the earliest extant records of ancient Greek culture. The Erinyes are featured prominently in the myth of Orestes, which recurs frequently throughout many works of ancient Greek literature. \nAeschylus.\nFeatured in ancient Greek literature, from poems to plays, the Erinyes form the Chorus and play a major role in the conclusion of Aeschylus's dramatic trilogy the \"Oresteia\". In the first play, \"Agamemnon\", King Agamemnon returns home from the Trojan War, where he is slain by his wife, Clytemnestra, who wants vengeance for her daughter Iphigenia, who was sacrificed by Agamemnon in order to obtain favorable winds to sail to Troy. In the second play, \"The Libation Bearers\", their son Orestes has reached manhood and has been commanded by Apollo's oracle to avenge his father's murder at his mother's hand. Returning home and revealing himself to his sister Electra, Orestes pretends to be a messenger bringing the news of his own death to Clytemnestra. He then slays his mother and her lover Aegisthus. Although Orestes' actions were what Apollo had commanded him to do, Orestes has still committed matricide, a grave sacrilege. Because of this, he is pursued and tormented by the terrible Erinyes, who demand yet further blood vengeance.\nIn \"The Eumenides\", Orestes is told by Apollo at Delphi that he should go to Athens to seek the aid of the goddess Athena. In Athens, Athena arranges for Orestes to be tried by a jury of Athenian citizens, with her presiding. The Erinyes appear as Orestes' accusers, while Apollo speaks in his defense. The trial becomes a debate about the necessity of blood vengeance, the honor that is due to a mother compared to that due to a father, and the respect that must be paid to ancient deities such as the Erinyes compared to the newer generation of Apollo and Athena. The jury vote is evenly split. Athena participates in the vote and chooses for acquittal. Athena declares Orestes acquitted because of the rules she established for the trial. Despite the verdict, the Erinyes threaten to torment all inhabitants of Athens and to poison the surrounding countryside. Athena, however, offers the ancient goddesses a new role, as protectors of justice, rather than vengeance, and of the city. She persuades them to break the cycle of blood for blood (except in the case of war, which is fought for glory, not vengeance). While promising that the goddesses will receive due honor from the Athenians and Athena, she also reminds them that she possesses the key to the storehouse where Zeus keeps the thunderbolts that defeated the other older deities. This mixture of bribes and veiled threats satisfies the Erinyes, who are then led by Athena in a procession to their new abode. In the play, the \"Furies\" are thereafter addressed as \"Semnai\" (Venerable Ones), as they will now be honored by the citizens of Athens and ensure the city's prosperity.\nEuripides.\nIn Euripides' \"Orestes\" the Erinyes are for the first time \"equated\" with the Eumenides (\u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2, pl. of \u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03c2; literally \"the gracious ones\", but also translated as \"Kindly Ones\"). This is because it was considered unwise to mention them by name (for fear of attracting their attention), the ironic name is similar to how Hades, god of the dead is styled Pluton, or Pluto, \"the Rich One\". Using euphemisms for the names of deities serves many religious purposes.\nSophocles.\nIn Sophocles's play, \"Oedipus at Colonus\", it is significant that Oedipus comes to his final resting place in the grove dedicated to the Erinyes. It shows that he has paid his penance for his blood crime, as well as come to integrate the balancing powers to his early over-reliance upon Apollo, the god of the individual, the sun, and reason. He is asked to make an offering to the Erinyes and complies, having made his peace.\nModern references and literature.\nThe Erinyes persist as a theme that appears in modern literature. They are mentioned in the poem \"To Brooklyn Bridge\" by Hart Crane. The Eumenides are also featured in T. S. Eliot's play, \"The Family Reunion\", Neil Gaiman's comic book series, \"The Sandman\", and Rick Riordan's book series, Percy Jackson and the Olympians. In the 1875 comic opera \"Trial by Jury\" by W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan, the Learned Judge describes himself as having once \"danced a dance like a semi-despondent fury\" while in Westminster Hall. The movie franchise Alien is said to be inspired by the Erinyes. \"The Kindly Ones\", the sixth novel in the Anthony Powell sequence \"A Dance to the Music of Time\" is set before and at the beginning of Britain's entrance to World War II. \"The Kindly Ones\" (original French title \"Les Bienveillantes\"), a 2006 Holocaust novel by Johnathan Littell, draws not only its title, but also many of its themes and its structure from Aeschylus's \"Oresteia\" trilogy."}
{"id": "10142", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10142", "title": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair", "text": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 4 January 1916 for John Hamilton-Gordon, 7th Earl of Aberdeen.\nFamily history.\nBaronetcy of Haddo.\nThe Gordon family descends from John Gordon, who fought as a Royalist against the Covenanters in the Civil War. In 1642 he was created a baronet, of Haddo in the County of Aberdeen, in the Baronetage of Nova Scotia. In 1644 he was found guilty of treason and beheaded, with the baronetcy forfeited. The title was restored after the Restoration for his son John, the second Baronet.\nEarldom of Aberdeen.\nThe second Baronet died without male issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Baronet. He was a noted advocate and served as Lord President of the Court of Session and as Lord Chancellor of Scotland. On 30 November 1682 he was raised to the Peerage of Scotland as Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, Viscount of Formartine and Earl of Aberdeen. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, the second Earl. He sat in the House of Lords as a Scottish Representative Peer from 1721 to 1727. On his death the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage, the third Earl. He was a Scottish Representative Peer from 1747 to 1761 and from 1774 to 1790.\nLord Aberdeen, Prime Minister.\nThe third earl was succeeded by his grandson, the fourth Earl, who was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo. On 1 June 1814 he was created Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, which entitled him to an automatic seat in the House of Lords. Lord Aberdeen was a distinguished diplomat and statesman and served as Foreign Secretary from 1828 to 1830 and from 1841 to 1846 and as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1852 to 1855. Aberdeen married firstly Lady Catherine Elizabeth (1784\u20131812), daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn, and assumed by Royal licence the additional surname of Hamilton in 1818. \nWhen Lord Aberdeen died, the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage to Harriet Douglas, the fifth Earl. He sat as Liberal Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire. His eldest son, the sixth Earl, was a sailor and adventurer. He was accidentally drowned off the coast of America in 1870, without marrying or having children.\nMarquess of Aberdeen and Temair.\nThe sixth earl of Aberdeen was succeeded by his younger brother, the seventh Earl. John Hamilton-Gordon, was a Liberal politician and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1886 and from 1905 to 1915 and as Governor General of Canada from 1893 to 1898. On 4 January 1916 he was created Earl of Haddo, in the County of Aberdeen, and Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll. Both titles are in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.\nHe was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Marquess, who was a member of the London County Council and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He was childless and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Marquess. He was notably President of the Federation of British Industries. When he died the titles passed to his eldest son, the fourth Marquess. He was a member of the Aberdeenshire County Council and Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He had four adopted children but no biological issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the fifth Marquess. He was a broadcaster working for the BBC. He never married and on his death in 1984 the titles passed to his fourth and youngest brother, the sixth Marquess. He was Chairman of The Arts Club. the titles are held by his grandson, the eighth Marquess, who succeeded in that year.\nOther family members.\nNumerous other members of the Gordon family have also gained distinction. The Hon. William Gordon (d. 1816), eldest son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a general in the Army. The Hon. Cosmo Gordon, second son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a colonel in the Army. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1739\u20131792), third son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a Lord of Session from 1788 to 1792 under the judicial title of Lord Rockville. His son William Duff-Gordon was Member of Parliament for Worcester. In 1815 he succeeded his uncle as second Baron of Halkin according to a special remainder and assumed the additional surname of Duff (see Duff-Gordon baronets for further history of this branch of the family). The Hon. William Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a vice-admiral in the Royal Navy and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1786\u20131815), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a soldier and was killed at the Battle of Waterloo.\nThe Hon. Sir Robert Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a diplomat and served as British Ambassador to Austria. The Hon. John Gordon (1792\u20131869), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was an admiral in the Royal Navy. The Hon. Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon (1817\u20131890), eldest son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a general in the Army and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire East. His eldest son, Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon was also a general in the Army. Reverend the Hon. Douglas Hamilton-Gordon (1824\u20131901), third son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was Chaplain-in-Ordinary to Queen Victoria and Canon of Salisbury. The Hon. Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, fourth son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a Liberal politician and was created Baron Stanmore in 1893 (see this title for more information on him and this branch of the family). Ishbel Hamilton-Gordon, Marchioness of Aberdeen and Temair, daughter of Dudley Marjoribanks, 1st Baron Tweedmouth, and wife of the first Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, was an author, philanthropist and an advocate of woman's interests.\nThe family seat is Haddo House, Aberdeenshire. The title Earl of Haddo is the courtesy title for the Marquess's eldest son and heir, the eldest son of whom uses the courtesy title Viscount of Formartine. The Marquesses of Aberdeen and Temair are related to the Marquesses of Huntly. Sir John Gordon (d. c. 1395) of Strathbogie, ancestor of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, was the brother of Elizabeth Gordon. She married Sir Alexander Seton (d. 1438) and was the mother of Alexander Gordon, 1st Earl of Huntly (ancestor of the Marquesses of Huntly).\nMarquesses of Aberdeen and Temair (1916).\nThe heir apparent is his son Ivo Alexander Ninian Gordon, Earl of Haddo (b. 18 July 2012).\nLine of succession.\nThere are further heirs to the subsidiary Earldom of Aberdeen, including the Duff-Gordon baronets, who are descended from Lord Rockville, a younger son of the second earl."}
{"id": "10143", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10143", "title": "East Brunswick", "text": ""}
{"id": "10147", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10147", "title": "East Coast Swing", "text": "East Coast Swing (ECS) is a form of social partner dance. It belongs to the group of swing dances. It is danced under fast swing music, including rock and roll and boogie-woogie.\nYerrington and Outland equated East Coast Swing to the New Yorker in 1961. Originally known as \"Eastern Swing\" by Arthur Murray Studios, the name East Coast Swing became more common between 1975 and 1980.\nHistory.\nThe dance was created by dance studios including the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s, based on the Lindy Hop. Lindy Hop was felt by dance studios to be both too difficult and too unstructured to teach to beginning dancers, but there was market demand for training in Swing Dance. The dance studios had initially dismissed Lindy Hop in particular as a fad. East Coast Swing can be referred to by many different names in different regions of the United States and the World. It has alternatively been called Eastern Swing, Jitterbug, American Swing, East Coast Lindy, Lindy (not to be confused with Lindy Hop), and Triple Swing. Other variants of East Coast Swing that use altered footwork forms are known as Single Swing or \"Single-step Swing\" (where the triple step is replaced by a single step forming a slow, slow, quick, quick rhythm common to Foxtrot), and Double Swing (using a tap-step footwork pattern).\nEast Coast Swing is a Rhythm Dance that has both 6 and 8 beat patterns.\nThe name \"East Coast Swing\" was coined initially to distinguish the dance from the street form and the new variant used in the competitive ballroom arena (as well as separating the dance from West Coast Swing, which was developed in California). While based on Lindy Hop, it does have clear distinctions. East Coast Swing is a standardized form of dance developed first for instructional purposes in the Arthur Murray studios, and then later codified to allow for a medium of comparison for competitive ballroom dancers. It can be said that there is no right or wrong way to dance it; however, certain styles of the dance are considered correct \"form\" within the technical elements documented and governed by the National Dance Council of America. The N.D.C.A. oversees all the standards of American Style Ballroom and Latin dances. Lindy Hop was never standardized and later became the inspiration for several other dance forms such as: (European) Boogie Woogie, Jive, East Coast Swing, West Coast Swing and Rock and Roll.\nIn practice on the social dance floor, the six count steps of the East Coast Swing are often mixed with the eight count steps of Lindy Hop, Charleston, and less frequently, Balboa.\nBasic technique.\nSingle-step Swing\nEast Coast Swing has a 6 count basic step. This is in contrast to the meter of most swing music, which has a 4 count basic rhythm. In practice, however, the 6-count moves of the east coast swing are often combined with 8-count moves from the Lindy hop, Charleston, and Balboa.\nDepending on the region and instructor, the basic step of single-step East Coast Swing is either \"rock step, step, step\" or \"step, step, rock step\". In both cases, the rock step always starts on the downbeat.\nFor \"rock step, step, step\" the beats, or counts, are the following:\nSteps for the \"lead\" (traditionally, the man's part)\nSteps for the \"follow\" (traditionally, the woman's part which mirrors the lead's part)\nFor \"step, step, rock step,\" the rock step occurs on beats 5 and 6, but the overall progression remains the same.\nThe normal steps can be substituted with a triple step or double step \"step-tap\" or \"kick-step\" instead of a single step. This is commonly used during songs when a slower tempo makes the single step difficult (an example progression would be \"rock step, triple step, triple step\").\nTiming.\nBecause East Coast uses a six step pattern with music employing 4 beats per measure, three measures of music are required to complete two sets of steps, as shown in the following table.\nThe rock step starts on 1, 2 the first triple step starts 3a4 and the second on 5a6.\nIn single time style (used with faster music) the triple steps are replaced by single steps, so two beats of music are used for each single step while each step in the rock (R) step (S) is still completed in one beat, finishing the cycle in six musical beats. Some instructors will teach vocalizing the single time style as\" \"Quick. Quick. Slow. Slow. \" or \"Back Step. Slow. Slow.\"\nThere is the choice to start with triples or with a rock step, however if you check the above chart where a triple step starts on a 1, 2 you can see that the pattern progresses and wraps back around. The choice of starting with a triple or a rock step does have musical consequences as music has phrasing with hits that often happen on 12, or 24 or 36... This means that dancers who choose to start with a rock step will probably find themselves on a rock step on every new phrase. Those who start with a triple will start with a triple on each new phrase. An advantage of starting with the triple step is that dancers can more easily change their foot work right at the start of the musical phrase."}
{"id": "10148", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10148", "title": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner", "text": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner (4 October 190316 October 1946) was a high-ranking Austrian SS official during the Nazi era and a major perpetrator of the Holocaust. He was Chief of the Reich Main Security Office (RSHA), which included the offices of Gestapo, Kripo, and SD, from January 1943 until the end of World War II in Europe.\nKaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party in 1930 and the SS in 1931, and by 1935 he was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. In 1938, he assisted in the \"Anschluss\" and was given command of the SS and police force in Austria. In January 1943, Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief of the RSHA, succeeding Reinhard Heydrich, who was assassinated in June 1942. \nA committed anti-Semite and fanatical Hitler loyalist, Kaltenbrunner oversaw a period in which the genocide of Jews intensified. He was the highest-ranking member of the SS to face trial at the first Nuremberg trials, where he was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Kaltenbrunner was sentenced to death and executed by hanging in October 1946.\nBiography.\nKaltenbrunner was born in Ried im Innkreis, Austria, the son of a lawyer, and educated at the Realgymnasium in Linz. Raised in a nationalist family, he was childhood friends with Adolf Eichmann, the infamous SS officer who played a key role in implementing the Nazis' \"Final Solution\" against Europe's Jews. After Gymnasium, Kaltenbrunner went on to obtain his doctorate degree in law at Graz University in 1926. He worked at a law firm in Salzburg for a year before opening his own law office in Linz. He had deep scars on his face from dueling in his student days, although some sources attribute them to an automobile accident.\nOn 14 January 1934, Kaltenbrunner married Elisabeth Eder (b. 1908) who was from Linz and a Nazi Party member. They had three children. In addition to the children from his marriage, Kaltenbrunner had twins, Ursula and Wolfgang, (b. 1945) with his long-time mistress Gisela Gr\u00e4fin von Westarp (n\u00e9e Wolf). All the children survived the war.\nSS career.\nOn 18 October 1930, Kaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party as member number 300,179. In 1931, he was the \"Bezirksredner\" (district speaker) for the Nazi Party in Upper Austria. Kaltenbrunner joined the SS on 31 August 1931; his SS number was 13,039. He first became a \"Rechtsberater\" (legal consultant) for the party in 1929 and later held this same position for SS Abschnitt (Section) VIII beginning in 1932. That same year, he began working at his father's law practice and by 1933 was head of the National-Socialist Lawyers' League in Linz.\nIn January 1934, Kaltenbrunner was briefly jailed at the Kaisersteinbruch detention camp with other Nazis for conspiracy by the Engelbert Dollfuss government. While there he led a hunger strike which forced the government to release 490 of the party members. In 1935, he was jailed again on suspicion of high treason. This charge was dropped, but he was sentenced to six months imprisonment for conspiracy and he lost his license to practice law.\nFrom mid-1935 Kaltenbrunner was head of the illegal SS Abschnitt VIII in Linz and was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. To provide Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and Heinz Jost with new information, Kaltenbrunner repeatedly made trips to Bavaria. Hiding on a train and on a ship that traveled to Passau, he would return with money and orders for Austrian comrades. Kaltenbrunner was arrested again in 1937, by Austrian authorities on charges of being head of the illegal Nazi Party organization in Ober\u00f6sterreich. He was released in September.\nActing on orders from Hermann G\u00f6ring, Kaltenbrunner assisted in the \"Anschluss\" with Germany in March 1938, and was awarded the role as the state secretary for public security in the Seyss-Inquart cabinet. Controlled from behind the scenes by Himmler, Kaltenbrunner still led, albeit clandestinely, the Austrian SS as part of his duty to 'coordinate' and manage the Austrian population. Then on 21 March 1938, he was promoted to SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\". He was a member of the \"Reichstag\" from 10 April 1938 until 8 May 1945. Amid this activity, he helped establish the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp near Linz. Mauthausen was the first Nazi concentration camp opened in Austria following the \"Anschluss\". On 11 September 1938, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to the rank of SS-\"Gruppenf\u00fchrer\", equivalent to a lieutenant general in the army while holding the position of F\u00fchrer of SS-Oberabschnitt \u00d6sterreich (re-designated SS-Oberabschnitt Donau in November 1938). Also in 1938, he was appointed High SS and police leader (\"H\u00f6herer SS- und Polizeif\u00fchrer\"; HSSPF) for Donau, which was the primary SS command in Austria (he held that post until 30 January 1943).\nWorld War II.\nIn June 1940, Kaltenbrunner was appointed Police President of Vienna and held that additional post for a year. In July 1940, he was commissioned as a SS-\"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" in the Waffen-SS Reserve. Throughout his many duties, Kaltenbrunner also developed an impressive intelligence network across Austria moving southeastwards, which eventually brought him to Himmler's attention for the assignment as chief of the RSHA in January 1943. The RSHA was composed of the SiPo (\"Sicherheitspolizei\"; the combined forces of the Gestapo and Kripo) along with the SD (\"Sicherheitsdienst\", Security Service). He replaced Heydrich, who was assassinated in June 1942. Kaltenbrunner held this position until the end of the war. Hardly anyone knew Kaltenbrunner and upon his appointment, Himmler transferred responsibility for both SS personnel and economics from the RSHA to the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office. Nonetheless, he was promoted to SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer und General der Polizei\" on 21 June 1943. He also replaced Heydrich as President of the International Criminal Police Commission (ICPC), the organization today known as Interpol.\nFear of a collapsing home-front due to the Allied bombing campaigns and that another \"stab-in-the-back\" at home could arise, as a result, caused Kaltenbrunner to immediately tighten the Nazi grip within Germany. From what historian Anthony Read relates, Kaltenbrunner's appointment as RSHA chief came as a surprise given the other possible candidates like head of the Gestapo, Heinrich M\u00fcller, or even SD foreign intelligence chief, Walter Schellenberg. Historian Richard Grunberger also added the name of Dr. Wilhelm Stuckart, the future minister of the German Interior as another potential candidate for head of the RSHA; however, he suggests that Kaltenbrunner was most likely selected since he was a comparative \"newcomer\" who would be more \"pliable\" in Himmler's hands.\nLike many of the ideological fanatics in the regime, Kaltenbrunner was a committed anti-Semite. According to former SS-\"Sturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Hans Georg Mayer, Kaltenbrunner was present at a December 1940 meeting among Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler, and Heydrich where it was decided to gas all Jews incapable of heavy physical work. Under Kaltenbrunner's command, the genocide of Jews picked up pace as \"the process of extermination was to be expedited and the concentration of the Jews in the Reich itself and the occupied countries were to be liquidated as soon as possible.\" Kaltenbrunner stayed constantly informed over the status of concentration camp activities, receiving periodic reports at his office in the RSHA.\nTo combat homosexuality across the greater Reich, Kaltenbrunner pushed the Ministry of Justice in July 1943 for an edict mandating compulsory castration for anyone found guilty of this offense. While this was rejected, he still took steps to get the army to review some 6,000 cases to prosecute homosexuals.\nDuring the summer of 1943, Kaltenbrunner conducted his second inspection of the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp. While he was there, 15 prisoners were selected to demonstrate for Kaltenbrunner three methods of killing; by a gunshot to the neck, hanging, and gassing. After the killings were performed, Kaltenbrunner inspected the crematorium and later the quarry. In October 1943, he told Herbert Kappler, the head of German police and security services in Rome, that the \"eradication of the Jews in Italy\" was of \"special interest\" for \"general security.\" Four days later, Kappler's SS and police units began rounding up and deporting Jews by train to Auschwitz concentration camp.\nIn 1944 when Hitler was in the process of strong-arming Admiral Horthy into submitting Hungary to the Nazis during an arranged meeting in Klessheim Castle in Salzburg, Kaltenbrunner was present for the negotiations and escorted him out once they were over. Accompanying Horthy and Kaltenbrunner on the journey back to Hungary was Adolf Eichmann, who brought with him a special \"Einsatzkommando\" unit to begin the process of \"rounding up and deporting Hungary's 750,000 Jews.\"\nIt was said that even Himmler feared him, as Kaltenbrunner was an intimidating figure with his height, facial scars, and volatile temper. Kaltenbrunner was also a longtime friend of Otto Skorzeny and recommended him for many secret missions, allowing Skorzeny to become one of Hitler's favorite agents. Kaltenbrunner was also responsible for heading Operation Long Jump, a plan to assassinate Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt in Tehran.\nImmediately in the wake of the 20 July Plot on Hitler's life in 1944, Kaltenbrunner was summoned to Hitler's wartime headquarters at the \"Wolfsschanze\" (Wolf's Lair) in East Prussia to begin the investigation into who was responsible for the assassination attempt. Once it was revealed that an attempted military coup against Hitler had been launched, Himmler and Kaltenbrunner had to tread carefully, as the military was not under the jurisdiction of the Gestapo or the SD. Since the attempt failed, the conspirators were soon identified. An estimated 5,000 people were eventually executed, with many more sent to concentration camps.\nHistorian Heinz H\u00f6hne counted Kaltenbrunner among fanatical Hitler loyalists and described him as being committed \"to the bitter end.\" Field reports from the SD in October 1944 about deteriorating morale in the military prompted Kaltenbrunner to urge the involvement of the RSHA in military court-martial proceedings, but this was rejected by Himmler who thought it unwise to interfere in \"Wehrmacht\" (army) affairs. In December 1944, Kaltenbrunner was granted the additional rank of General of the Waffen-SS. On 15 November 1944 he was awarded the Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross with Swords. In addition, he was awarded the NSDAP Golden Party Badge and the \"Blutorden\" (Blood Order). Using his authority as Chief of the RSHA, Kaltenbrunner issued a decree on 6 February 1945 that allowed policemen to shoot \"disloyal\" people at their discretion, without judicial review.\nOn 12 March 1945, a meeting took place in the Vorarlberg between Kaltenbrunner and Carl Jacob Burckhardt, president of the International Committee of the Red Cross (1945\u201348). Just over a month later, Himmler was informed that SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" (general) Karl Wolff had been negotiating with the Allies for the capitulation of Italy. When questioned by Himmler, Wolff explained that he was operating under Hitler's orders and attempting to play the Allies against one another. Himmler believed him, but Kaltenbrunner did not and told Himmler that an informant claimed Wolff also negotiated with Cardinal Schuster of Milan and was about to surrender occupied Italy to the Allies. Himmler angrily repeated the allegations and Wolff, feigning offense, challenged Himmler to present these statements to Hitler. Unnerved by Wolff's demands, Himmler backed down, and Hitler sent Wolff back to Italy to continue his purported disruption of the Allies.\nIn mid-April 1945, three weeks before the war ended, Himmler named Kaltenbrunner commander-in-chief of the remaining German forces in Southern Europe. Kaltenbrunner attempted to organize cells for post-war sabotage in the region and Germany but accomplished little. Hitler made one of his last appearances on 20 April 1945 outside the subterranean \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" in Berlin, where he pinned medals on boys from the Hitler Youth for their bravery. Kaltenbrunner was among those present, but realizing the end was near, he then fled from Berlin.\nArrest.\nOn 12 May 1945 Kaltenbrunner was apprehended along with his adjutant, Arthur Scheidler, and two SS guards in a remote cabin at the top of the Totes Gebirge mountains near Altaussee, Austria, by a search party initiated by the 80th Infantry Division, Third U.S. Army. Information had been gained from Johann Brandauer, the assistant burgermeister of Altaussee, that the party was hiding out with false papers in the cabin. This was supported by an eyewitness sighting by the Altaussee mountain ranger five days earlier. Special Agent Robert E. Matteson from the C.I.C. Detachment organized and led a patrol consisting of Brandauer, four ex-Wehrmacht soldiers, and a squad of US soldiers to effect the arrest. The party climbed over mountainous and glacial terrain for six hours in darkness before arriving at the cabin. After a short standoff, all four men exited the cabin and surrendered without a shot fired. Kaltenbrunner claimed to be a doctor and offered a false name. However, upon their arrival back to town his mistress, Countess Gisela von Westarp, and the wife (Iris) of his adjutant Arthur Scheidler chanced to spot the men being led away, the ladies called out to both men and embraced them. This action resulted in their identification and arrest by US troops. \nIn 2001, Ernst Kaltenbrunner's personal Nazi security seal was found in an Alpine lake in Styria, Austria, 56 years after he had thrown it away to hide his identity. The seal was recovered by a Dutch citizen on holiday. The seal has the words \"Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD\" (Chief of the Security Police and SD) engraved on it. Experts have examined the seal and believe it was discarded in the final days of the war in May 1945.\nNuremberg trials.\nAt the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was charged with conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Due to the areas over which he exercised responsibility as an SS general and as chief of the RSHA, he was acquitted of crimes against peace, but held responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nDuring the initial stages of the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was absent because of two episodes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, which required several weeks of recovery time. After his health improved, the tribunal denied his request for pardon. When he was released from a military hospital he pleaded not guilty to the charges of the indictment against him. Kaltenbrunner said all decrees and legal documents that bore his signature were \"rubber-stamped\" and filed by his adjutant(s). He also said Gestapo Chief Heinrich M\u00fcller had illegally affixed his signature to numerous documents in question.\nKaltenbrunner argued in his defense that his position as RSHA chief existed only theoretically and said he was only active in matters of espionage and intelligence. He maintained that Himmler, as his superior, was the person culpable for the atrocities committed during his tenure as chief of the RSHA. Kaltenbrunner also asserted that he had no knowledge of the Final Solution before 1943 and went on to claim that he protested against the ill-treatment of the Jews to Himmler and Hitler. Further denials from Kaltenbrunner included statements that he knew nothing of the Commissar Order and that he never visited Mauthausen concentration camp, despite documentation of his visit. At one point, Kaltenbrunner went so far as to avow that \"he\" was responsible for bringing the Final Solution to an end.\nConviction and execution.\nOn 30 September 1946, the International Military Tribunal found Kaltenbrunner not guilty of crimes against peace, but guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity (counts three and four). On 1 October 1946, the IMT sentenced him to death by hanging.\nKaltenbrunner was executed on 16 October 1946, around 1:15\u00a0a.m., in Nuremberg. His body, like those of the other nine executed men and that of Hermann G\u00f6ring (who committed suicide the previous day), was cremated at the Eastern Cemetery in Munich and the ashes were scattered in a tributary of the River Isar. \nExternal links.\n \n \n "}
{"id": "10149", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10149", "title": "Englebert Dolfuss", "text": ""}
{"id": "10150", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10150", "title": "Engelbert Dollfuss", "text": "Engelbert Dollfuss (, ; 4 October 1892 \u2013 25 July 1934) was an Austrian politician who served as Chancellor of Austria between 1932 and 1934. Having served as Minister for Forests and Agriculture, he ascended to Federal Chancellor in 1932 in the midst of a crisis for the conservative government. In early 1933, he dissolved parliament and assumed dictatorial powers. Suppressing the Socialist movement in February 1934 during the Austrian Civil War and later banning the Austrian Nazi Party, he cemented the rule of \"Austrofascism\" through the authoritarian \"First of May Constitution\". Dollfuss was assassinated as part of a failed coup attempt by Nazi agents in 1934. His successor Kurt Schuschnigg maintained the regime until Adolf Hitler's annexation of Austria in 1938.\nEarly life.\nDollfuss was born to a poor, peasant family in the hamlet of Great Maierhof in the commune of St. Gotthard near Texingtal in Lower Austria. Young Dollfuss spent his childhood in his step-father's house in the nearby commune of Kirnberg, where he also went to elementary school. The local parish priests helped to finance Dollfuss' education, as his parents were unable to do so by themselves alone. He attended high school in Hollabrunn. After graduating from high school, Dollfuss intended to become a priest, and thus he enrolled at the University of Vienna to study theology, but after a few months changed course and started studying law in 1912. As a student, he earned a livelihood giving lessons. He became a member of the Students' Social Movement, a student organisation dedicated to social and charitable work among the workers.\nAs World War I broke out, Dollfuss reported to be recruited in Vienna but was rejected because he was two centimetres shorter than the minimum. Fully grown, he was less than in height, and later was nicknamed \"Millimetternich\", a portmanteau of millimetre and Klemens von Metternich. The same day he was rejected in Vienna, Dolfuss went to St. P\u00f6lten where the recruiting commission for his district was located and insisted to be recruited, even though he did not meet the minimum height standards, and was accepted. As a volunteer, he had a right to choose a regiment in which he would serve, and Dollfuss opted for the Tyrolese militia also known as the \"Kaisersch\u00fctzen\". He was soon promoted to the rank of corporal. He served for 37 months at the Italian Front, south of Tyrol. By 1916 he was promoted to lieutenant.\nAfter the war, he was still a student and was employed by the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union, which helped him to secure his material existence, and it was here where Dollfuss gained his first political experience. There, he organised peasants to help them recover from the war, as well as shield them from the influences of Marxism. Being recognised for his abilities he showed at the Union, he was sent for further studies to Berlin. In Berlin, he began to garner dislike for some of his professors, as academia there was substantially influenced by liberalism and socialism. In his studies, he devoted himself to the Christian principles of economics. In Germany, he became a member of the Federation of German Peasants' Union and of the Preussenkasse \u2013 essentially, a central bank for member-cooperatives, where he gained practical experience. In Germany, he met his future wife Alwine Glienke, a descendant of a Pomeranian family. Dollfuss often met with Carl Sonnenschein, leader of social activities of students and the pioneer of the Catholic movement in Berlin.\nAfter returning to Vienna, he was a secretary of the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union. He devoted his efforts to consolidate that industry. Dollfuss was instrumental in the founding of the regional Chamber of Agriculture of Lower Austria, becoming its secretary and a director; the Federation of Agriculture and the Agricultural Labourers\u2019 Insurance Institute; in organising the new Agrarian policy of Lower Austria and in laying the foundations for the corporative organisation of agriculture. A few years later, he was representative of Austria at the International Agrarian Congress, where his proposals made him internationally known in that sphere. He was seen as an unofficial leader of the Austrian peasantry.\nOn 1 October 1930 Dollfuss was appointed the president of the Federal Railways, the largest industrial corporation in Austria. There, Dollfuss came into contact with all branches of the industry. In March 1931, he was appointed Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.\nChancellor of Austria.\nOn 10 May 1932, Dollfuss, age 39 and with only one year's experience in the Federal Government, was offered the office of Chancellor by President Wilhelm Miklas, also a member of the Christian-Social Party. Dollfuss refused to reply, instead spending the night in his favourite church praying, returning in the morning for a bath and a spartan meal before replying to the President he would accept the offer. Dollfuss was sworn in on 20 May 1932 as head of a coalition government between the Christian-Social Party, the Landbund \u2014 a right-wing agrarian party \u2014 and Heimatblock, the parliamentary wing of the \"Heimwehr\", a paramilitary ultra-nationalist group. The coalition assumed the pressing task of tackling the problems of the Great Depression. Much of the Austro-Hungarian Empire's industry had been situated in the areas that became part of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia after World War I as a result of the Treaty of Saint-Germain. Postwar Austria was therefore economically disadvantaged.\nDollfuss' majority in Parliament was marginal; his government had only a one-vote majority.\nDollfuss as dictator of Austria.\nIn March 1933, an argument arose over irregularities in the voting procedure. The Social Democratic president of the National Council (the lower house of parliament) Karl Renner resigned to be able to cast a vote as a parliament member. As a consequence, the two vice presidents, belonging to other parties, resigned as well to be able to vote. Without a president, the parliament could not conclude the session. Dollfuss took the three resignations as a pretext to declare that the National Council had become unworkable, and advised President Wilhelm Miklas to issue a decree adjourning it indefinitely. When the National Council wanted to reconvene days after the resignation of the three presidents, Dollfuss had police bar entrance to parliament, effectively eliminating democracy in Austria. From that point onwards, he governed as dictator by emergency decree with absolute power.\nDollfuss was concerned that with German National Socialist leader Adolf Hitler becoming Chancellor of Germany in 1933, the Austrian National Socialists (DNSAP) could gain a significant minority in future elections (according to fascism scholar Stanley G. Payne, should elections have been held in 1933, the DNSAP could have mustered about 25% of the votes \u2013 contemporary \"Time\" magazine analysts suggest a higher support of 50%, with a 75% approval rate in the Tyrol region bordering Nazi Germany). In addition, the Soviet Union's influence in Europe had increased throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. Dollfuss banned the communists on 26 May 1933 and the DNSAP on 19 June 1933. Under the banner of Christian Social Party, he later established a one-party dictatorship rule largely modeled after fascism in Italy, banning all other Austrian parties including the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDAP\u00d6). Social Democrats however continued to exist as an independent organization, nevertheless, without its paramilitary \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\", which until 31 March 1933 could have mustered tens of thousands against Dollfuss' government.\nAustrofascism.\nDollfuss modelled Austrofascism according to Catholic corporatist ideals with anti-secularist tones and in a similar way to Italian fascism, dropping Austrian pretenses of unification with Germany as long as the Nazi Party remained in power. In August 1933, Benito Mussolini's regime issued a guarantee of Austrian independence. Dollfuss also exchanged 'Secret Letters' with Mussolini about ways to guarantee Austrian independence. Mussolini was interested in Austria forming a buffer zone against Nazi Germany. Dollfuss always stressed the similarity of the regimes of Hitler in Germany and Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union, and was convinced that Austrofascism and Italian fascism could counter totalitarian national socialism and communism in Europe.\nIn September 1933 Dollfuss merged his Christian Social Party with elements of other nationalist and conservative groups, including the Heimwehr, which encompassed many workers who were unhappy with the radical leadership of the socialist party, to form the \"Vaterl\u00e4ndische Front\", though the Heimwehr continued to exist as an independent organization until 1936, when Dollfuss' successor Kurt von Schuschnigg forcibly merged it into the Front, instead creating the unabidingly loyal \"Frontmiliz\" as paramilitary task force. Dollfuss survived an assassination attempt in October 1933 by Rudolf Dertill, a 22-year-old who had been ejected from the military for his national socialist views.\nAustrian civil war.\nIn February 1934 the security forces provoked arrests of Social Democrats and searches for weapons of the Social Democrats' already outlawed Republikanischer Schutzbund. After the Dollfuss dictatorship took steps against known Social Democrats, the Social Democrats called for nationwide resistance against the government. A civil war began, which lasted sixteen days, from 12 until 27 February. Fierce fighting took place primarily in the East of Austria, especially in the streets of some outer Vienna districts, where large fortress-like municipal workers' buildings were situated, and in the northern, industrial areas of the province of Styria, where Nazi agents had great interest in a bloodbath between security forces and workers' militias. The resistance was suppressed by police and military power. The Social Democrats were outlawed, and their leaders were imprisoned or fled abroad.\nNew constitution.\nDollfuss staged a parliamentary session with just his party members present in April 1934 to have his new constitution approved, effectively the second constitution in the world espousing corporatist ideas after that of the Portuguese \"Estado Novo\". The session retrospectively made all the decrees already passed since March 1933 legal. The new constitution became effective on 1 May 1934 and swept away the last remnants of democracy and the system of the first Austrian Republic.\nAssassination.\nDollfuss was assassinated on 25 July 1934 by ten Austrian Nazis (Paul Hudl, Franz Holzweber, Otto Planetta and others) of Regiment 89 who entered the Chancellery building and shot him in an attempted \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". In his dying moments he asked for Viaticum, the Eucharist administered to a person who is dying, but his assassins refused to give it to him. Mussolini had no hesitation in attributing the attack to the German dictator: the news reached him at Cesena, where he was examining the plans for a psychiatric hospital. Mussolini, known as \"Il Duce\", personally gave the announcement to Dollfuss's widow, who was a guest at his villa in Riccione with her children. He also put at the disposal of Ernst R\u00fcdiger Starhemberg, who spent a holiday in Venice, a plane that allowed the prince to rush back to Vienna and to face the assailants with his militia, with the permission of President Wilhelm Miklas.\nMussolini also mobilised a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria to thwart the putsch. Then he announced to the world: \"The independence of Austria, for which he has fallen, is a principle that has been defended and will be defended by Italy even more strenuously\", and then replaced in the main square of Bolzano the statue of Walther von der Vogelweide, a Germanic troubadour, with that of Drusus, a Roman general who conquered part of Germany. This was the greatest moment of friction between Italian Fascism and National Socialism and Mussolini himself came down several times to reaffirm the differences in the field.\nThe assassination of Dollfuss was accompanied by uprisings in many regions in Austria, resulting in further deaths. In Carinthia, a large contingent of northern German Nazis tried to seize power but were subdued by the Italian units nearby. At first Hitler was jubilant, but the Italian reaction surprised him. Hitler became convinced that he could not face a conflict with the Western European powers, and he officially denied liability, stating his regret for the murder of the Austrian Prime Minister. He replaced the ambassador to Vienna with Franz von Papen and prevented the conspirators entering Germany, also expelling them from the Austrian Nazi Party. The Nazi assassins in Vienna, after declaring the formation of a new government under Austrian Nazi Anton Rintelen, previously exiled by Dollfuss as Austrian Ambassador to Rome, surrendered after threats from the Austrian military of blowing up the Chancellery using dynamite, and were subsequently tried and executed by hanging. Kurt Schuschnigg, previously Minister of Education, was appointed new chancellor of Austria after a few days, assuming the office from Dollfuss\u2019 deputy Starhemberg.\nOut of a population of 6.5 million, approximately 500,000 Austrians were present at Dollfuss\u2019 burial in Vienna. He is interred in the Hietzing cemetery in Vienna beside his wife Alwine Dollfuss (d. 1973) and two of his children, Hannerl and Eva, all of whom were in Italy as guests of Rachele Mussolini at the time of his death, an event which saw Mussolini himself shed tears over his slain ally.\nIn literature.\nIn Bertolt Brecht's 1941 play \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\", Dollfuss is represented by the character \"Dullfeet\".&lt;ref name=\"The New York Times - 9 May 1991- Review/Theater; Brecht's Cauliflower King In Another Resistible Rise\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nReferences.\nBooks.\n "}
{"id": "10151", "revid": "19614559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10151", "title": "E. T. A. Hoffmann", "text": "Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (commonly abbreviated as E. T. A. Hoffmann; born Ernst Theodor Wilhelm Hoffmann; 24 January 177625 June 1822) was a German Romantic author of fantasy and Gothic horror, a jurist, composer, music critic and artist. His stories form the basis of Jacques Offenbach's opera \"The Tales of Hoffmann\", in which Hoffmann appears (heavily fictionalized) as the hero. He is also the author of the novella \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", on which Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" is based. The ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\" is based on two other stories that Hoffmann wrote, while Schumann's \"Kreisleriana\" is based on Hoffmann's character Johannes Kreisler. See also Schumann's Fantasiest\u00fccke, Op. 12. \nHoffmann's stories highly influenced 19th-century literature, and he is one of the major authors of the Romantic movement.\nLife.\nYouth.\nHoffmann's ancestors, both maternal and paternal, were jurists. His father, Christoph Ludwig Hoffmann (1736\u201397), was a barrister in K\u00f6nigsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), as well as a poet and amateur musician who played the viola da gamba. In 1767 he married his cousin, Lovisa Albertina Doerffer (1748\u201396). Ernst Theodor Wilhelm, born on 24 January 1776, was the youngest of three children, of whom the second died in infancy.\nWhen his parents separated in 1778, his father went to Insterburg (now Chernyakhovsk) with his elder son, Johann Ludwig Hoffmann (1768\u20131822), while Ernst's mother stayed in K\u00f6nigsberg with her relatives: two aunts, Johanna Sophie Doerffer (1745\u20131803) and Charlotte Wilhelmine Doerffer (c. 1754\u201379) and their brother, Otto Wilhelm Doerffer (1741\u20131811), who were all unmarried. The trio raised the youngster.\nThe household, dominated by the uncle (whom Ernst nicknamed \"O Weh\"\u2014\"Oh dear!\"\u2014in a play on his initials), was pietistic and uncongenial. Hoffmann was to regret his estrangement from his father. Nevertheless, he remembered his aunts with great affection, especially the younger, Charlotte, whom he nicknamed \"Tante F\u00fc\u00dfchen\" (\"Aunt Littlefeet\"). Although she died when he was only three years old, he treasured her memory (e.g. see \"Kater Murr\") and embroidered stories about her to such an extent that later biographers sometimes assumed her to be imaginary, until proof of her existence was found after World War II.\nBetween 1781 and 1792 he attended the Lutheran school or \"Burgschule\", where he made good progress in classics. He was taught drawing by one Saemann, and counterpoint by a Polish organist named Podbileski, who was to be the prototype of Abraham Liscot in \"Kater Murr\". Ernst showed great talent for piano-playing, and busied himself with writing and drawing. The provincial setting was not, however, conducive to technical progress, and despite his many-sided talents he remained rather ignorant of both classical forms and of the new artistic ideas that were developing in Germany. He had, however, read Schiller, Goethe, Swift, Sterne, Rousseau and Jean Paul, and wrote part of a novel titled \"Der Geheimnisvolle\".\nAround 1787 he became friends with Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Younger (1775\u20131843), the son of a pastor, and nephew of Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Elder, the well-known writer friend of Immanuel Kant. During 1792, both attended some of Kant's lectures at the University of K\u00f6nigsberg. Their friendship, although often tested by an increasing social difference, was to be lifelong.\nIn 1794, Hoffmann became enamored of Dora Hatt, a married woman to whom he had given music lessons. She was ten years older, and gave birth to her sixth child in 1795. In February 1796, her family protested against his attentions and, with his hesitant consent, asked another of his uncles to arrange employment for him in Glogau (G\u0142og\u00f3w), Prussian Silesia.\nThe provinces.\nFrom 1796, Hoffmann obtained employment as a clerk for his uncle, Johann Ludwig Doerffer, who lived in Glogau with his daughter Minna. After passing further examinations he visited Dresden, where he was amazed by the paintings in the gallery, particularly those of Correggio and Raphael. During the summer of 1798, his uncle was promoted to a court in Berlin, and the three of them moved there in August\u2014Hoffmann's first residence in a large city. It was there that Hoffmann first attempted to promote himself as a composer, writing an operetta called \"Die Maske\" and sending a copy to Queen Luise of Prussia. The official reply advised to him to write to the director of the Royal Theatre, a man named Iffland. By the time the latter responded, Hoffmann had passed his third round of examinations and had already left for Posen (Pozna\u0144) in South Prussia in the company of his old friend Hippel, with a brief stop in Dresden to show him the gallery.\nFrom June 1800 to 1803, he worked in Prussian provinces in the area of Greater Poland and Masovia. This was the first time he had lived without supervision by members of his family, and he started to become \"what school principals, parsons, uncles, and aunts call dissolute.\"\nHis first job, at Posen, was endangered after Carnival on Shrove Tuesday 1802, when caricatures of military officers were distributed at a ball. It was immediately deduced who had drawn them, and complaints were made to authorities in Berlin, who were reluctant to punish the promising young official. The problem was solved by \"promoting\" Hoffmann to P\u0142ock in New East Prussia, the former capital of Poland (1079\u20131138), where administrative offices were relocated from Thorn (Toru\u0144). He visited the place to arrange lodging, before returning to Posen where he married Mischa (Maria or Marianna Thekla Michalina Rorer, whose Polish surname was Trzci\u0144ska). They moved to P\u0142ock in August 1802.\nHoffmann despaired because of his exile, and drew caricatures of himself drowning in mud alongside ragged villagers. He did make use, however, of his isolation, by writing and composing. He started a diary on 1 October 1803. An essay on the theatre was published in Kotzebue's periodical, \"Die Freim\u00fcthige\", and he entered a competition in the same magazine to write a play. Hoffmann's was called \"Der Preis\" (\"The Prize\"), and was itself about a competition to write a play. There were fourteen entries, but none was judged worthy of the award: 100 Friedrichs d'or. Nevertheless, his entry was singled out for praise. This was one of the few good times of a sad period of his life, which saw the deaths of his uncle J. L. Hoffmann in Berlin, his Aunt Sophie, and Dora Hatt in K\u00f6nigsberg.\nAt the beginning of 1804, he obtained a post at Warsaw. On his way there, he passed through his hometown and met one of Dora Hatt's daughters. He was never to return to K\u00f6nigsberg.\nWarsaw.\nHoffmann assimilated well with Polish society; the years spent in Prussian Poland he recognized as the happiest of his life. In Warsaw he found the same atmosphere he had enjoyed in Berlin, renewing his friendship with Zacharias Werner, and meeting his future biographer, a neighbour and fellow jurist called Julius Eduard Itzig (who changed his name to Hitzig after his baptism). Itzig had been a member of the Berlin literary group called the \"Nordstern,\" or \"North Stars,\" and he gave Hoffmann the works of Novalis, Ludwig Tieck, Achim von Arnim, Clemens Brentano, Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, Carlo Gozzi and Calder\u00f3n. These relatively late introductions marked his work profoundly.\nHe moved in the circles of August Wilhelm Schlegel, Adelbert von Chamisso, Friedrich de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9, Rahel Levin and David Ferdinand Koreff.\nBut Hoffmann's fortunate position was not to last: on 28 November 1806, during the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon Bonaparte's troops captured Warsaw, and the Prussian bureaucrats lost their jobs. They divided the contents of the treasury between them and fled. In January 1807, Hoffmann's wife and two-year-old daughter C\u00e4cilia returned to Posen, while he pondered whether to move to Vienna or go back to Berlin. A delay of six months was caused by severe illness. Eventually the French authorities demanded that all former officials swear allegiance or leave the country. As they refused to grant Hoffmann a passport to Vienna, he was forced to return to Berlin.\nHe visited his family in Posen before arriving in Berlin on 18 June 1807, hoping to further his career there as an artist and writer.\nBerlin and Bamberg.\nThe next fifteen months were some of the worst in Hoffmann's life.\nThe city of Berlin was also occupied by Napoleon's troops. Obtaining only meagre allowances, he had frequent recourse to his friends, constantly borrowing money and still going hungry for days at a time; he learned that his daughter had died. Nevertheless, he managed to compose his Six Canticles for \"a cappella\" choir: one of his best compositions, which he would later attribute to Kreisler in \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\".\nOn 1 September 1808 he arrived with his wife in Bamberg, where he began a job as theatre manager. The director, Count Soden, left almost immediately for W\u00fcrzburg, leaving a man named Heinrich Cuno in charge. Hoffmann was unable to improve standards of performance, and his efforts caused intrigues against him which resulted in him losing his job to Cuno. He began work as music critic for the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\", a newspaper in Leipzig, and his articles on Beethoven were especially well received, and highly regarded by the composer himself. It was in its pages that the \"Kapellmeister Johannes Kreisler\" character made his first appearance.\nHoffmann's breakthrough came in 1809, with the publication of \"Ritter Gluck\", a story about a man who meets, or believes he has met, the composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714\u201387) more than twenty years after the latter's death. The theme alludes to the work of Jean Paul, who invented the term Doppelg\u00e4nger the previous decade, and continued to exact a powerful influence over Hoffmann, becoming one of his earliest admirers. With this publication, Hoffmann began to use the pseudonym E. T. A. Hoffmann, telling people that the \"A\" stood for \"Amadeus\", in homage to the composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756\u201391). However, he continued to use Wilhelm in official documents throughout his life, and the initials E. T. W. also appear on his gravestone.\nThe next year, he was employed at the Bamberg Theatre as stagehand, decorator, and playwright, while also giving private music lessons.\nHe became so enamored of a young singing student, Julia Marc, that his feelings were obvious whenever they were together, and Julia's mother quickly found her a more suitable match. When Joseph Seconda offered Hoffmann a position as musical director for his opera company (then performing in Dresden), he accepted, leaving on 21 April 1813.\nDresden and Leipzig.\nPrussia had declared war against France on 16 March during the War of the Sixth Coalition, and their journey was fraught with difficulties. They arrived on the 25th, only to find that Seconda was in Leipzig; on the 26th, they sent a letter pleading for temporary funds. That same day Hoffmann was surprised to meet Hippel, whom he had not seen for nine years.\nThe situation deteriorated, and in early May Hoffmann tried in vain to find transport to Leipzig. On 8 May, the bridges were destroyed, and his family were marooned in the city. During the day, Hoffmann would roam, watching the fighting with curiosity. Finally, on 20 May, they left for Leipzig, only to be involved in an accident which killed one of the passengers in their coach and injured his wife.\nThey arrived on 23 May, and Hoffmann started work with Seconda's orchestra, which he found to be of the best quality. On 4 June an armistice began, which allowed the company to return to Dresden. But on 22 August, after the end of the armistice, the family was forced to relocate from their pleasant house in the suburbs into the town, and during the next few days the Battle of Dresden raged. The city was bombarded; many people were killed by bombs directly in front of him. After the main battle was over, he visited the gory battlefield. His account can be found in \"Vision auf dem Schlachtfeld bei Dresden\". After a long period of continued disturbance, the town surrendered on 11 November, and on 9 December the company travelled to Leipzig.\nOn 25 February, Hoffmann quarrelled with Seconda, and the next day he was given notice of twelve weeks. When asked to accompany them on their journey to Dresden in April, he refused, and they left without him. But during July his friend Hippel visited, and soon he found himself being guided back into his old career as a jurist.\nBerlin.\nAt the end of September 1814, in the wake of Napoleon's defeat, Hoffmann returned to Berlin and succeeded in regaining a job at the \"Kammergericht\", the chamber court. His opera \"Undine\" was performed by the Berlin Theatre. Its successful run came to an end only after a fire on the night of the 25th performance. Magazines clamoured for his contributions, and after a while his standards started to decline. Nevertheless, many masterpieces date from this time.\nDuring the period from 1819, Hoffmann was involved with legal disputes, while fighting ill health. Alcohol abuse and syphilis eventually caused weakening of his limbs during 1821, and paralysis from the beginning of 1822. His last works were dictated to his wife or to a secretary.\nPrince Metternich's anti-liberal programs began to put Hoffmann in situations that tested his conscience. Thousands of people were accused of treason for having certain political opinions,\nand university professors were monitored during their lectures.\nKing Frederick William III of Prussia appointed an Immediate Commission for the investigation of political dissidence; when he found its observance of the rule of law too frustrating, he established a Ministerial Commission to interfere with its processes. The latter was greatly influenced by Commissioner Kamptz. During the trial of \"Turnvater\" Jahn, the founder of the gymnastics association movement, Hoffmann found himself annoying Kamptz, and became a political target. When Hoffmann caricatured Kamptz in a story (\"Meister Floh\"), Kamptz began legal proceedings. These ended when Hoffmann's illness was found to be life-threatening. The King asked for a reprimand only, but no action was ever taken. Eventually \"Meister Floh\" was published with the offending passages removed.\nHoffmann died of syphilis in Berlin on 25 June 1822 at the age of 46. His grave is preserved in the Protestant \"Friedhof III der Jerusalems- und Neuen Kirchengemeinde\" (Cemetery No. III of the congregations of Jerusalem Church and New Church) in Berlin-Kreuzberg, south of Hallesches Tor at the underground station Mehringdamm.\nAssessment.\nHoffmann is one of the best-known representatives of German Romanticism, and a pioneer of the fantasy genre, with a taste for the macabre combined with realism that influenced such authors as Edgar Allan Poe (1809\u20131849), Nikolai Gogol (1809\u20131852), Charles Dickens (1812\u20131870), Charles Baudelaire (1821\u20131867), George MacDonald (1824\u20131905), Fyodor Dostoevsky (1821\u20131881), Vernon Lee (1856\u20131935), Franz Kafka (1883\u20131924) and Alfred Hitchcock (1899\u20131980). Hoffmann's story \"Das Fr\u00e4ulein von Scuderi\" is sometimes cited as the first detective story and a direct influence on Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\"; Characters from it also appear in the opera \"Cardillac\" by Paul Hindemith.\nThe twentieth-century Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin characterised Hoffmann's works as Menippea, essentially satirical and self-parodying in form, thus including him in a tradition that includes Cervantes, Diderot and Voltaire.\nRobert Schumann's piano suite Kreisleriana (1838) takes its title from one of Hoffmann's books (and according to Charles Rosen's \"The Romantic Generation\", is possibly also inspired by \"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", in which Kreisler appears). Jacques Offenbach's masterwork, the opera \"Les contes d'Hoffmann\" (\"The Tales of Hoffmann\", 1881), is based on the stories, principally \"Der Sandmann\" (\"The Sandman\", 1816), \"Rat Krespel\" (\"Councillor Krespel\", 1818), and \"Das verlorene Spiegelbild\" (\"The Lost Reflection\") from \"Die Abenteuer der Silvester-Nacht\" (\"The Adventures of New Year's Eve\", 1814). \"Klein Zaches genannt Zinnober\" (\"Little Zaches called Cinnabar\", 1819) inspired an aria as well as the operetta \"Le Roi Carotte\", 1872). Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" (1892) is based on \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", and the ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\", with music by Delibes, is based on two eerie Hoffmann stories.\nHoffmann also influenced 19th-century musical opinion directly through his music criticism. His reviews of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (1808) and other important works set new literary standards for writing about music, and encouraged later writers to consider music as \"the most Romantic of all the arts.\" Hoffmann's reviews were first collected for modern readers by Friedrich Schnapp, ed., in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann: Schriften zur Musik; Nachlese\" (1963) and have been made available in an English translation in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann's Writings on Music, Collected in a Single Volume\" (2004).\nHoffmann strove for artistic polymathy. He created far more in his works than mere political commentary achieved through satire. His masterpiece novel \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" (\"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", 1819\u20131821) deals with such issues as the aesthetic status of true artistry and the modes of self-transcendence that accompany any genuine endeavour to create. Hoffmann's portrayal of the character Kreisler (a genius musician) is wittily counterpointed with the character of the tomcat Murr \u2013 a virtuoso illustration of artistic pretentiousness that many of Hoffmann's contemporaries found offensive and subversive of Romantic ideals.\nHoffmann's literature indicates the failings of many so-called artists to differentiate between the superficial and the authentic aspects of such Romantic ideals. The \"self-conscious\" effort to impress must, according to Hoffmann, be divorced from the \"self-aware\" effort to create. This essential duality in \"Kater Murr\" is conveyed structurally through a discursive 'splicing together' of two biographical narratives.\nScience fiction.\nWhile disagreeing with E. F. Bleiler's claim that Hoffman was \"one of the two or three greatest writers of fantasy\", Algis Budrys of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" said that he \"did lay down the groundwork for some of our most enduring themes\".\nHistorian Martin Willis argues that Hoffmann's impact on science fiction has been overlooked, saying \"his work reveals a writer dynamically involved in the important scientific debates of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.\" Willis points out that Hoffmann's work is contemporary with \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and with \"the heated debates and the relationship between the new empirical science and the older forms of natural philosophy that held sway throughout the eighteenth century.\" His \"interest in the machine culture of his time is well represented in his short stories, of which the critically renowned \"The Sandman\" (1816) and \"Automata\" (1814) are the best examples. ...Hoffmann's work makes a considerable contribution to our understanding of the emergence of scientific knowledge in the early years of the nineteenth century and to the conflict between science and magic, centred mainly on the 'truths' available to the advocates of either practice. ...Hoffmann's balancing of mesmerism, mechanics, and magic reflects the difficulty in categorizing scientific knowledge in the early nineteenth century.\""}
{"id": "10152", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10152", "title": "Erasmus", "text": "Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus (; English: Erasmus of Rotterdam; 28 October 1466 - 12 July 1536) was a Dutch philosopher and Christian scholar who is widely considered to have been one of the greatest scholars of the northern Renaissance. As a Catholic priest, Erasmus was an important figure in classical scholarship who wrote in a pure Latin style. Among humanists he enjoyed the sobriquet \"Prince of the Humanists\", and has been called \"the crowning glory of the Christian humanists\". Using humanist techniques for working on texts, he prepared important new Latin and Greek editions of the New Testament, which raised questions that would be influential in the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation. He also wrote \"On Free Will,\" \"In Praise of Folly\", \"Handbook of a Christian Knight\", \"On Civility in Children\", \"\", \"Julius Exclusus\", and many other works.\nErasmus lived against the backdrop of the growing European religious Reformation. While he was critical of the abuses within the Catholic Church and called for reform, he nonetheless kept his distance from Luther, Henry VIII, and John Calvin and continued to recognise the authority of the pope, emphasizing a middle way with a deep respect for traditional faith, piety and grace, and rejecting Luther's emphasis on faith alone. Erasmus remained a member of the Catholic Church all his life, remaining committed to reforming the Church and its clerics' abuses from within. He also held to the doctrine of synergism, which some Reformers (Calvinists) rejected in favor of the doctrine of monergism. His middle road (\"\") approach disappointed, and even angered, scholars in both camps.\nErasmus died suddenly in Basel in 1536 while preparing to return to Brabant and was buried in Basel Minster, the former cathedral of the city. A bronze statue of Erasmus was erected in 1622 in his city of birth, replacing an earlier work in stone.\nEarly life.\nDesiderius Erasmus is reported to have been born in Rotterdam on 28 October in the late 1460s. He was named after Saint Erasmus of Formiae, whom Erasmus's father Gerard personally favored. A 17th-century legend has it that Erasmus was first named Geert Geerts (also Gerhard Gerhards or Gerrit Gerritsz), but this is unfounded. A well-known wooden picture indicates: \"Goud\u00e6 conceptus, Roterodami natus\" (Latin for \"Conceived in Gouda, born in Rotterdam)\". According to an article by historian Renier Snooy (1478\u20131537), Erasmus was born in Gouda.\nThe exact year of his birth is controversial but most agree it was in 1466. Evidence confirming the year of Erasmus's birth in 1466 can be found in his own words: fifteen out of twenty-three statements he made about his age indicate 1466. He was christened \"Erasmus\" after the saint of that name. Although associated closely with Rotterdam, he lived there for only four years, never to return afterwards. Information on his family and early life comes mainly from vague references in his writings. His parents were not legally married. His father, Gerard, was a Catholic priest and curate in Gouda. His mother was Margaretha Rogerius (Latinized form of Dutch surname Rutgers) the daughter of a doctor from Zevenbergen. She may have been Gerard's housekeeper. Although he was born out of wedlock, Erasmus was cared for by his parents until their early deaths from the Plague in 1483. This solidified his view of his origin as a stain and cast a pall over his youth.\nErasmus was given the highest education available to a young man of his day, in a series of monastic or semi-monastic schools. In 1475, at the age of nine, he and his older brother Peter were sent to one of the best Latin schools in the Netherlands, located at Deventer and owned by the chapter clergy of the Lebu\u00efnuskerk (St Lebuin's Church), though some earlier biographies assert it was a school run by the Brethren of the Common Life. During his stay there the curriculum was renewed by the principal of the school, Alexander Hegius. For the first time ever in Europe, Greek was taught at a lower level than a university and this is where he began learning it. He also gleaned there the importance of a personal relationship with God but eschewed the harsh rules and strict methods of the religious brothers and educators. His education there ended when plague struck the city about 1483, and his mother, who had moved to provide a home for her sons, died from the infection.\nOrdination and monastic experience.\nMost likely in 1487, poverty forced Erasmus into the consecrated life as a canon regular of St. Augustine at the canonry of Stein, in South Holland. He took vows there in late 1488 and was ordained to the Catholic priesthood on 25 April 1492. It is said that he never seemed to have actively worked as a priest for a long time, and certain abuses in religious orders were among the chief objects of his later calls to reform the Church from within.\nWhile at Stein, Erasmus supposedly fell in love with a fellow canon, Servatius Rogerus, and wrote a series of passionate letters in which he called Rogerus \"half my soul\", writing that \"I have wooed you both unhappily and relentlessly\". This correspondence contrasts sharply with the generally detached and much more restrained attitude he showed in his later life. Later, while tutoring in Paris, he was suddenly dismissed by the guardian of Thomas Grey. Some have taken this as evidence of an illicit affair. No personal denunciation was made of Erasmus during his lifetime, however, and he took pains in later life to distance these earlier episodes by condemning sodomy in his works, and praising sexual desire in marriage between men and women.\nSoon after his priestly ordination, he got his chance to leave the canonry when offered the post of secretary to the Bishop of Cambrai, Henry of Bergen, on account of his great skill in Latin and his reputation as a man of letters. To allow him to accept that post, he was given a temporary dispensation from his religious vows on the grounds of poor health and love of humanistic studies, though he remained a priest. Pope Leo X later made the dispensation permanent, a considerable privilege at the time.\nEducation and scholarship.\nIn 1495, with Bishop Henry's consent and a stipend, Erasmus went on to study at the University of Paris in the Coll\u00e8ge de Montaigu, a centre of reforming zeal, under the direction of the ascetic Jan Standonck, of whose rigors he complained. The University was then the chief seat of Scholastic learning but already coming under the influence of Renaissance humanism. For instance, Erasmus became an intimate friend of an Italian humanist Publio Fausto Andrelini, poet and \"professor of humanity\" in Paris.\nIn 1499 he was invited to England by William Blount, 4th Baron Mountjoy, who offered to accompany him on his trip to England. According to Thomas Penn, Erasmus was \"ever susceptible to the charms of attractive, well-connected, and rich young men\". His time in England was fruitful in the making of lifelong friendships with the leaders of English thought in the days of King Henry VIII: John Colet, Thomas More, John Fisher, Thomas Linacre and William Grocyn. At the University of Cambridge, he was the Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity and turned down the option of spending the rest of his life as a professor there. Erasmus stayed at Queens' College, from 1510 to 1515. His rooms were located in the \"I\" staircase of Old Court, and he showed a marked disdain for the ale and weather of England.\nErasmus suffered from poor health and complained that Queens' College could not supply him with enough decent wine (wine was the Renaissance medicine for gallstones, from which Erasmus suffered). Until the early 20th century, Queens' College used to have a corkscrew that was purported to be \"Erasmus's corkscrew\", which was a third of a metre long; as of 1987, the college still had what it calls \"Erasmus's chair\". Today Queens' College also has an Erasmus Building and an Erasmus Room. His legacy is marked for someone who complained bitterly about the lack of comforts and luxuries to which he was accustomed. As Queens' was an unusually humanist-leaning institution in the 16th century, Queens' College Old Library still houses many first editions of Erasmus's publications, many of which were acquired during that period by bequest or purchase, including Erasmus's New Testament translation, which is signed by friend and Polish religious reformer Jan \u0141aski. From 1505 to 1508 Erasmus's friend, Chancellor John Fisher, was president of Queens' College. His friendship with Fisher is the reason he chose to stay at Queens' while lecturing in Greek at the University.\nDuring his first visit to England in 1499, he taught at the University of Oxford. Erasmus was particularly impressed by the Bible teaching of John Colet, who pursued a style more akin to the church fathers than the Scholastics. This prompted him, upon his return from England, to master the Greek language, which would enable him to study theology on a more profound level and to prepare a new edition of Jerome's late-14th century Bible translation. On one occasion he wrote to Colet: \nI cannot tell you, dear Colet, how I hurry on, with all sails set, to holy literature. How I dislike everything that keeps me back, or retards me.\nDespite a chronic shortage of money, he succeeded in learning Greek by an intensive, day-and-night study of three years, continuously begging in letters that his friends send him books and money for teachers. Discovery in 1506 of Lorenzo Valla's \"New Testament Notes\" encouraged Erasmus to continue the study of the New Testament.\nErasmus preferred to live the life of an independent scholar and made a conscious effort to avoid any actions or formal ties that might inhibit his freedom of intellect and literary expression. Throughout his life, he was offered positions of honor and profit in academia but declined them all, preferring the uncertain but sufficient rewards of independent literary activity. He did however assist his friend John Colet by authoring Greek textbooks and procuring members of staff for the newly established St Paul's School. From 1506 to 1509, he was in Italy: in 1506 he graduated as Doctor of Divinity from the University of Turin, and he spent part of the time as a proofreader at the publishing house of Aldus Manutius in Venice. According to his letters, he was associated with the Venetian natural philosopher, Giulio Camillo, but apart from this he had a less active association with Italian scholars than might have been expected.\nHis residence at Leuven, where he lectured at the University, exposed Erasmus to much criticism from those ascetics, academics and clerics hostile to the principles of literary and religious reform and to the loose norms of the Renaissance adherents to which he was devoting his life. In 1517, he supported the foundation at the University, by his friend Hieronymus van Busleyden, of the Collegium Trilingue for the study of Hebrew, Latin, and Greek \u2013 after the model of the College of the Three Languages at the University of Alcal\u00e1. However, feeling that the lack of sympathy that prevailed at Leuven at that time was actually a form of mental persecution, he sought refuge in Basel, where under the shelter of Swiss hospitality he could express himself freely. Admirers from all quarters of Europe visited him there and he was surrounded by devoted friends, notably developing a lasting association with the great publisher Johann Froben.\nOnly when he had mastered Latin did he begin to express himself on major contemporary themes in literature and religion. He felt called upon to use his learning in a purification of doctrine by returning to the historic documents and original languages of sacred scripture. He tried to free the methods of scholarship from the rigidity and formalism of medieval traditions, but he was not satisfied with this. His revolt against certain forms of Christian monasticism and scholasticism was not based on doubts about the truth of doctrine, nor from hostility to the organization of the Church itself, nor from rejection of celibacy or monastic lifestyles. He saw himself as a preacher of righteousness by an appeal to reason, applied frankly and without fear of the magisterium. He always intended to remain faithful to Catholic doctrine and therefore was convinced he could criticize frankly virtually everyone and everything. Aloof from entangling obligations, Erasmus was the centre of the literary movement of his time, corresponding with more than five hundred men in the worlds of politics and of thought.\nSpain's polyglot Bible and Erasmus's Greek New Testament.\nThe first translation.\nIn 1502, in Spain, Cardinal Francisco Jim\u00e9nez de Cisneros had put together a team of Spanish translators to create a compilation of the Bible in four languages: Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic and Latin. Translators for Greek were commissioned from Greece itself and worked closely with Latinists. Cardinal Cisneros's team completed and printed the full New Testament, including the Greek translation, in 1514. To do so they developed specific types to print Greek. Cisneros informed Erasmus of the works going on in Spain and may have sent a printed version of the New Testament to him. However, the Spanish team wanted the entire Bible to be released as one single work and withdrew from publication.\nThe information and the delay allowed Erasmus to request a \"Publication Privilege\" of four years for the Greek New Testament to ensure that his work would be published first. He obtained it in 1516 from both Pope Leo X, to whom he would dedicate his work, and Emperor Maximilian I. Erasmus's Greek New Testament was published first, in 1516, forcing the Spanish team of Cisneros to wait until 1520 to publish their Complutensian Polyglot Bible.\nIt is hard to say if Erasmus's actions had an effect on delaying the publication of the Complutensian Polyglot, causing the Spanish team to take more time, or if it made no difference in their perfectionism. The Spanish copy was approved for publication by the Pope in 1520; however, it was not released until 1522 due to the team's insistence on reviewing and editing. Only fifteen errors have been found in the entire six volumes and four languages of Cisneros's bible, an extraordinarily low number for the time. The fear of their publishing first, though, affected Erasmus's work, rushing him to printing and causing him to forgo editing. The result was a large number of translation mistakes, transcription errors, and typos, that required further editions to be printed (see \"publication\").\nThe Translation of Erasmus.\nErasmus had been working for years on two projects: a collation of Greek texts and a fresh Latin New Testament. In 1512, he began his work on this Latin New Testament. He collected all the Vulgate manuscripts he could find to create a critical edition. Then he polished the language. He declared, \"It is only fair that Paul should address the Romans in somewhat better Latin.\" In the earlier phases of the project, he never mentioned a Greek text:\nMy mind is so excited at the thought of emending Jerome\u2019s text, with notes, that I seem to myself inspired by some god. I have already almost finished emending him by collating a large number of ancient manuscripts, and this I am doing at enormous personal expense.\nWhile his intentions for publishing a fresh Latin translation are clear, it is less clear why he included the Greek text. Though some speculate that he intended to produce a critical Greek text or that he wanted to beat the Complutensian Polyglot into print, there is no evidence to support this. He wrote, \"There remains the New Testament translated by me, with the Greek facing, and notes on it by me.\" He further demonstrated the reason for the inclusion of the Greek text when defending his work:\nBut one thing the facts cry out, and it can be clear, as they say, even to a blind man, that often through the translator\u2019s clumsiness or inattention the Greek has been wrongly rendered; often the true and genuine reading has been corrupted by ignorant scribes, which we see happen every day, or altered by scribes who are half-taught and half-asleep.\nSo he included the Greek text to permit qualified readers to verify the quality of his Latin version. But by first calling the final product \"Novum Instrumentum omne\" (\"All of the New Teaching\") and later \"Novum Testamentum omne\" (\"All of the New Testament\") he also indicated clearly that he considered a text in which the Greek and the Latin versions were consistently comparable to be the essential core of the church's New Testament tradition.\nContribution.\nIn a way it is legitimate to say that Erasmus \"synchronized\" or \"unified\" the Greek and the Latin traditions of the New Testament by producing an updated translation of both simultaneously. Both being part of canonical tradition, he clearly found it necessary to ensure that both were actually present in the same content. In modern terminology, he made the two traditions \"compatible\". This is clearly evidenced by the fact that his Greek text is not just the basis for his Latin translation, but also the other way round: there are numerous instances where he edits the Greek text to reflect his Latin version. For instance, since the last six verses of \"Revelation\" were missing from his Greek manuscript, Erasmus translated the Vulgate's text back into Greek. Erasmus also translated the Latin text into Greek wherever he found that the Greek text and the accompanying commentaries were mixed up, or where he simply preferred the Vulgate's reading to the Greek text.\nPublication and editions.\nErasmus said it was \"rushed into print rather than edited\", resulting in a number of transcription errors. After comparing what writings he could find, Erasmus wrote corrections between the lines of the manuscripts he was using (among which was Minuscule 2) and sent them as proofs to Froben. His hurried effort was published by his friend Johann Froben of Basel in 1516 and thence became the first published Greek New Testament, the \"Novum Instrumentum omne, diligenter ab Erasmo Rot. Recognitum et Emendatum\". Erasmus used several Greek manuscript sources because he did not have access to a single complete manuscript. Most of the manuscripts were, however, late Greek manuscripts of the Byzantine textual family and Erasmus used the oldest manuscript the least because \"he was afraid of its supposedly erratic text.\" He also ignored much older and better manuscripts that were at his disposal.\nIn the second (1519) edition, the more familiar term \"Testamentum\" was used instead of \"Instrumentum\". This edition was used by Martin Luther in his German translation of the Bible, written for people who could not understand Latin. Together, the first and second editions sold 3,300 copies. By comparison, only 600 copies of the Complutensian Polyglot were ever printed. The first and second edition texts did not include the passage (1 John 5:7\u20138) that has become known as the Comma Johanneum. Erasmus had been unable to find those verses in any Greek manuscript, but one was supplied to him during production of the third edition. The Catholic Church decreed that the \"Comma Johanneum\" was open to dispute (2 June 1927), and it is rarely included in modern scholarly translations.\nThe third edition of 1522 was probably used by Tyndale for the first English New Testament (Worms, 1526) and was the basis for the 1550 Robert Stephanus edition used by the translators of the Geneva Bible and King James Version of the English Bible. Erasmus published a fourth edition in 1527 containing parallel columns of Greek, Latin Vulgate and Erasmus's Latin texts. In this edition Erasmus also supplied the Greek text of the last six verses of Revelation (which he had translated from Latin back into Greek in his first edition) from Cardinal Ximenez's \"Biblia Complutensis\". In 1535 Erasmus published the fifth (and final) edition which dropped the Latin Vulgate column but was otherwise similar to the fourth edition. Later versions of the Greek New Testament by others, but based on Erasmus's Greek New Testament, became known as the \"Textus Receptus\".\nErasmus dedicated his work to Pope Leo X as a patron of learning and regarded this work as his chief service to the cause of Christianity. Immediately afterwards, he began the publication of his \"Paraphrases of the New Testament\", a popular presentation of the contents of the several books. These, like all of his writings, were published in Latin but were quickly translated into other languages with his encouragement.\nErasmus, in his capacity as humanist editor, advised major printers such as Aldus Manutius on which manuscripts to publish.\nBeginnings of Protestantism.\nAttempts at impartiality in dispute.\nThe Protestant Reformation began in the year following the publication of his edition of the Greek New Testament (1516) and tested Erasmus's character. The issues between the Catholic Church and the growing religious movement which would later become known as Protestantism, had become so clear that few could escape the summons to join the debate. Erasmus, at the height of his literary fame, was inevitably called upon to take sides, but partisanship was foreign to his nature and his habits. Despite all his criticism of clerical corruption and abuses within the Catholic Church, which lasted for years and was also directed towards many of the Church's basic doctrines, Erasmus shunned the Reformation movement along with its most radical and reactionary offshoots, and sided with neither party.\nThe world had laughed at his satire, but few had interfered with his activities. He believed that his work so far had commended itself to the best minds and also to the dominant powers in the religious world. Erasmus did not build a large body of supporters with his letters. He chose to write in Greek and Latin, the languages of scholars. His critiques reached an elite but small audience.\nDisagreement with Luther.\n\"Free will does not exist\", according to Luther in his letter \"De Servo Arbitrio\" to Erasmus translated into German by Justus Jonas (1526), in that sin makes human beings completely incapable of bringing themselves to God. Noting Luther's criticism of the Catholic Church, Erasmus described him as \"a mighty trumpet of gospel truth\" while agreeing, \"It is clear that many of the reforms for which Luther calls are urgently needed.\" He had great respect for Luther, and Luther spoke with admiration of Erasmus's superior learning. Luther hoped for his cooperation in a work which seemed only the natural outcome of his own. In their early correspondence, Luther expressed boundless admiration for all Erasmus had done in the cause of a sound and reasonable Christianity and urged him to join the Lutheran party. Erasmus declined to commit himself, arguing that to do so would endanger his position as a leader in the movement for pure scholarship which he regarded as his purpose in life. Only as an independent scholar could he hope to influence the reform of religion. When Erasmus hesitated to support him, the straightforward Luther became angered that Erasmus was avoiding the responsibility due either to cowardice or a lack of purpose. However, any hesitancy on the part of Erasmus may have stemmed, not from lack of courage or conviction, but rather from a concern over the mounting disorder and violence of the reform movement. To Philip Melanchthon in 1524 he wrote:\nI know nothing of your church; at the very least it contains people who will, I fear, overturn the whole system and drive the princes into using force to restrain good men and bad alike. The gospel, the word of God, faith, Christ, and Holy Spirit \u2013 these words are always on their lips; look at their lives and they speak quite another language.\nAgain, in 1529, he writes \"An epistle against those who falsely boast they are Evangelicals\" to Vulturius Neocomus (Gerardus Geldenhouwer). Here Erasmus complains of the doctrines and morals of the Reformers:\nYou declaim bitterly against the luxury of priests, the ambition of bishops, the tyranny of the Roman Pontiff, and the babbling of the sophists; against our prayers, fasts, and Masses; and you are not content to retrench the abuses that may be in these things, but must needs abolish them entirely. ...Look around on this 'Evangelical' generation, and observe whether amongst them less indulgence is given to luxury, lust, or avarice, than amongst those whom you so detest. Show me any one person who by that Gospel has been reclaimed from drunkenness to sobriety, from fury and passion to meekness, from avarice to liberality, from reviling to well-speaking, from wantonness to modesty. I will show you a great many who have become worse through following it. ...The solemn prayers of the Church are abolished, but now there are very many who never pray at all. ...I have never entered their conventicles, but I have sometimes seen them returning from their sermons, the countenances of all of them displaying rage, and wonderful ferocity, as though they were animated by the evil spirit. ...Who ever beheld in their meetings any one of them shedding tears, smiting his breast, or grieving for his sins? ...Confession to the priest is abolished, but very few now confess to God. ...They have fled from Judaism that they may become Epicureans.\nApart from these perceived moral failings of the Reformers, Erasmus also dreaded any change in doctrine, citing the long history of the Church as a bulwark against innovation. In book I of his \"Hyperaspistes\" he puts the matter bluntly to Luther:\nWe are dealing with this: Would a stable mind depart from the opinion handed down by so many men famous for holiness and miracles, depart from the decisions of the Church, and commit our souls to the faith of someone like you who has sprung up just now with a few followers, although the leading men of your flock do not agree either with you or among themselves \u2013 indeed though you do not even agree with yourself, since in this same \"Assertion\" you say one thing in the beginning and something else later on, recanting what you said before.\nContinuing his chastisement of Luther \u2013 and undoubtedly put off by the notion of there being \"no pure interpretation of Scripture anywhere but in Wittenberg\" \u2013 Erasmus touches upon another important point of the controversy:\nYou stipulate that we should not ask for or accept anything but Holy Scripture, but you do it in such a way as to require that we permit you to be its sole interpreter, renouncing all others. Thus the victory will be yours if we allow you to be not the steward but the lord of Holy Scripture.\nThough he sought to remain firmly neutral in doctrinal disputes, each side accused him of siding with the other, perhaps because of his neutrality. It was not for lack of fidelity with either side but a desire for fidelity with them both:\nI detest dissension because it goes both against the teachings of Christ and against a secret inclination of nature. I doubt that either side in the dispute can be suppressed without grave loss.\nIn his catechism (entitled \"Explanation of the Apostles' Creed\") (1533), Erasmus took a stand against Luther's teaching by asserting the unwritten Sacred Tradition as just as valid a source of revelation as the Bible, by enumerating the Deuterocanonical books in the canon of the Bible and by acknowledging seven sacraments. He called \"blasphemers\" anyone who questioned the perpetual virginity of Mary. However, he supported lay access to the Bible.\nIn a letter to Nikolaus von Amsdorf, Luther objected to Erasmus's catechism and called Erasmus a \"viper,\" \"liar,\" and \"the very mouth and organ of Satan\".\nAs regards the Reformation, Erasmus was accused by the monks to have: prepared the way and was responsible for Martin Luther. Erasmus, they said, had laid the egg, and Luther had hatched it. Erasmus wittily dismissed the charge, claiming that Luther had hatched a different bird entirely.\nFree will.\nTwice in the course of the great discussion, he allowed himself to enter the field of doctrinal controversy, a field foreign to both his nature and his previous practices. One of the topics he dealt with was free will, a crucial question. In his \"De libero arbitrio diatribe sive collatio\" (1524), he lampoons the Lutheran view on free will. He lays down both sides of the argument impartially. The \"Diatribe\" did not encourage any definite action; this was its merit to the Erasmians and its fault in the eyes of the Lutherans. In response, Luther wrote his \"De servo arbitrio\" (On the Bondage of the Will, 1525), which attacks the \"Diatribe\" and Erasmus himself, going so far as to claim that Erasmus was not a Christian. Erasmus responded with a lengthy, two-part \"Hyperaspistes\" (1526\u201327). In this controversy Erasmus lets it be seen that he would like to claim more for free will than St. Paul and St. Augustine seem to allow according to Luther's interpretation. For Erasmus the essential point is that humans have the freedom of choice. The conclusions Erasmus reached drew upon a large array of notable authorities, including, from the Patristic period, Origen, John Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine, in addition to many leading Scholastic authors, such as Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus. The content of Erasmus's works also engaged with later thought on the state of the question, including the perspectives of the \"via moderna\" school and of Lorenzo Valla, whose ideas he rejected.\nAs the popular response to Luther gathered momentum, the social disorders, which Erasmus dreaded and Luther disassociated himself from, began to appear, including the German Peasants' War, the Anabaptist disturbances in Germany and in the Low Countries, iconoclasm, and the radicalization of peasants across Europe. If these were the outcomes of reform, he was thankful that he had kept out of it. Yet he was ever more bitterly accused of having started the whole \"tragedy\" (as the Catholics dubbed Protestantism).\nWhen the city of Basel definitely adopted the Reformation in 1529, Erasmus gave up his residence there and settled in the imperial town of Freiburg im Breisgau.\nReligious toleration.\nCertain works of Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration and ecumenism. For example, in \"De libero arbitrio\", opposing certain views of Martin Luther, Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language, \"because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived.\" Gary Remer writes, \"Like Cicero, Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors.\" Although Erasmus did not oppose the Catholic Counter-Reformation and the punishment of heretics, in individual cases he generally argued for moderation and against the death penalty. He wrote, \"It is better to cure a sick man than to kill him.\"\nSacraments.\nA test of the Reformation was the doctrine of the sacraments, and the crux of this question was the observance of the Eucharist. In 1530, Erasmus published a new edition of the orthodox treatise of Algerus against the heretic Berengar of Tours in the eleventh century. He added a dedication, affirming his belief in the reality of the Body of Christ after consecration in the Eucharist, commonly referred to as transubstantiation. The sacramentarians, headed by \u0152colampadius of Basel, were, as Erasmus says, quoting him as holding views similar to their own in order to try to claim him for their schismatic and \"erroneous\" movement.\nDeath.\nWhen his strength began to fail, he decided to accept an invitation by Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent of the Netherlands, to move from Freiburg to Brabant. However, during preparations for the move in 1536, he suddenly died from an attack of dysentery during a visit to Basel. He had remained loyal to the papal authorities in Rome, but he did not have the opportunity to receive the last rites of the Catholic Church; the reports of his death do not mention whether he asked for a priest or not. According to Jan van Herwaarden, this is consistent with his view that outward signs were not important; what mattered is the believer's direct relationship with God, which he noted \"as the [Catholic] church believes\". However, Herwaarden observes that \"he did not dismiss the rites and sacraments out of hand but asserted a dying person could achieve a state of salvation without the priestly rites, provided their faith and spirit were attuned to God.\"\nHe was buried with great ceremony in Basel Minster (the former cathedral) there.\nHis last words, as recorded by his friend Beatus Rhenanus, were apparently \"Dear God\" (). A bronze statue of him was erected in the city of his birth in 1622, replacing an earlier work in stone.\nWritings.\nErasmus wrote both on church subjects and those of general human interest. By the 1530s, the writings of Erasmus accounted for 10 to 20 percent of all book sales in Europe. \nWith the collaboration of Publio Fausto Andrelini, he formed a paremiography (collection) of Latin proverbs and adages, commonly titled \"Adagia\".He is credited with coining the adage, \"In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.\" Erasmus is also generally credited with originating the phrase \"Pandora's box\", arising through an error in his translation of Hesiod's \"Pandora\" in which he confused \"pithos\" (storage jar) with \"pyxis\" (box).\nHis more serious writings begin early with the \"Enchiridion militis Christiani,\" the \"Handbook of the Christian Soldier\" (1503 \u2013 translated into English a few years later by the young William Tyndale). (A more literal translation of \"enchiridion \u2013\" \"dagger\" \u2013 has been likened to \"the spiritual equivalent of the modern Swiss Army knife.\") In this short work, Erasmus outlines the views of the normal Christian life, which he was to spend the rest of his days elaborating. The chief evil of the day, he says, is formalism \u2013 going through the motions of tradition without understanding their basis in the teachings of Christ. Forms can teach the soul how to worship God, or they may hide or quench the spirit. In his examination of the dangers of formalism, Erasmus discusses monasticism, saint worship, war, the spirit of class and the foibles of \"society.\" The \"Enchiridion\" is more like a sermon than a satire. With it Erasmus challenged common assumptions, painting the clergy as educators who should share the treasury of their knowledge with the laity. He emphasized personal spiritual disciplines and called for a reformation which he characterized as a collective return to the Fathers and Scripture. Most importantly, he extolled the reading of scripture as vital because of its power to transform and motivate toward love. Much like the Brethren of the Common Life, he wrote that the New Testament is the law of Christ people are called to obey and that Christ is the example they are called to imitate.\nAccording to Ernest Barker, \"Besides his work on the New Testament, Erasmus laboured also, and even more arduously, on the early Fathers. Among the Latin Fathers he edited the works of St Jerome, St Hilary, and St Augustine; among the Greeks he worked on Irenaeus, Origen and Chrysostom.\"\nErasmus also wrote of the legendary Frisian freedom fighter and rebel Pier Gerlofs Donia (Greate Pier), though more often in criticism than in praise of his exploits. Erasmus saw him as a dim, brutal man who preferred physical strength to wisdom.\nOne of Erasmus's best-known works, is \"The Praise of Folly\", written in 1509, published in 1511 under the double title \"Moriae encomium\" (Greek, Latinised) and \"Laus stultitiae\" (Latin).It is inspired by \"De triumpho stultitiae\" written by Italian humanist Faustino Perisauli. A satirical attack on superstitions and other traditions of European society in general and the western Church in particular, it was dedicated to Sir Thomas More, whose name the title puns.\nThe \"Institutio principis Christiani\" or \"Education of a Christian Prince\"\"\" (Basel, 1516) was written as advice to the young king Charles of Spain (later Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor). Erasmus applies the general principles of honor and sincerity to the special functions of the Prince, whom he represents throughout as the servant of the people. \"Education\" was published in 1516, three years after Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's \"The Prince\" was written; a comparison between the two is worth noting. Machiavelli stated that, to maintain control by political force, it is safer for a prince to be feared than loved. Erasmus preferred for the prince to be loved, and strongly suggested a well-rounded education in order to govern justly and benevolently and avoid becoming a source of oppression.\nAs a result of his reformatory activities, Erasmus found himself at odds with both of the great parties. His last years were embittered by controversies with men toward whom he was sympathetic. Notable among these was Ulrich von Hutten, a brilliant but erratic genius who had thrown himself into the Lutheran cause and declared that Erasmus, if he had a spark of honesty, would do the same. In his reply in 1523, \"Spongia adversus aspergines Hutteni\", Erasmus displays his skill in semantics. He accuses Hutten of having misinterpreted his utterances about reform and reiterates his determination never to break with the Church.\nThe writings of Erasmus exhibit a continuing concern with language, and in 1525 he devoted an entire treatise to the subject, \"Lingua\". This and several of his other works are said to have provided a starting point for a philosophy of language, though Erasmus did not produce a completely elaborated system.\nThe \"Ciceronianus\" came out in 1528, attacking the style of Latin that was based exclusively and fanatically on Cicero's writings. \u00c9tienne Dolet wrote a riposte titled \"Erasmianus\" in 1535.\nErasmus's last major work, published the year of his death, is the \"Ecclesiastes\" or \"Gospel Preacher\" (Basel, 1536), a massive manual for preachers of around a thousand pages. Though somewhat unwieldy because Erasmus was unable to edit it properly in his old age, it is in some ways the culmination of all of Erasmus's literary and theological learning, offering prospective preachers advice on nearly every conceivable aspect of their vocation with extraordinarily abundant reference to classical and biblical sources.\n\"Sileni Alcibiadis\" (1515).\nErasmus's \"Sileni Alcibiadis\" is one of his most direct assessments of the need for Church reform. Johann Froben published it first within a revised edition of the \"Adagia\" in 1515, then as a stand-alone work in 1517. This essay has been likened to John Colet's \"Convocation Sermon\", though the styles differ.\n\"Sileni\" is the plural (Latin) form of \"Silenus\", a creature often related to the Roman wine god Bacchus and represented in pictorial art as inebriated, merry revellers, variously mounted on donkeys, singing, dancing, playing flutes, etc. Alcibiades was a Greek politician in the 5th century BCE and a general in the Peloponnesian War; he figures here more as a character written into some of Plato's dialogues \u2013 a young, debauched playboy whom Socrates tries to convince to seek truth instead of pleasure, wisdom instead of pomp and splendor.\nThe term \"Sileni \u2013\" especially when juxtaposed with the character of Alcibiades \u2013 can therefore be understood as an evocation of the notion that something on the inside is more expressive of a person's character than what one sees on the outside. For instance, something or someone ugly on the outside can be beautiful on the inside, which is one of the main points of Plato's dialogues featuring \"Alcibiades\" and the \"Symposion\", in which Alcibiades also appears.\nIn support of this, Erasmus states, \"Anyone who looks closely at the inward nature and essence will find that nobody is further from true wisdom than those people with their grand titles, learned bonnets, splendid sashes and bejeweled rings, who profess to be wisdom\u2019s peak.\" On the other hand, Erasmus lists several Sileni and then questions whether Christ is the most noticeable Silenus of them all. The Apostles were Sileni since they were ridiculed by others. He believes that the things which are the least ostentatious can be the most significant, and that the Church constitutes all Christian people \u2013 that despite contemporary references to clergy as the whole of the Church, they are merely its servants. He criticizes those that spend the Church's riches at the people's expense. The true point of the Church is to help people lead Christian lives. Priests are supposed to be pure, yet when they stray, no one condemns them. He criticizes the riches of the popes, believing that it would be better for the Gospel to be most important.\nLegacy.\nThe popularity of his books is reflected in the number of editions and translations that have appeared since the sixteenth century. Ten columns of the catalogue of the British Library are taken up with the enumeration of the works and their subsequent reprints. The greatest names of the classical and patristic world are among those translated, edited, or annotated by Erasmus, including Saint Ambrose, Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Saint Basil, Saint John Chrysostom, Cicero and Saint Jerome.\nIn his native Rotterdam, the University and Gymnasium Erasmianum have been named in his honor. Between 1997 and 2009, one of the main metro lines of the city was named \"Erasmuslijn\". In 2003, a poll showing that most Rotterdammers believed Erasmus to be the designer of the local Erasmus Bridge, instigated the founding of the Foundation Erasmus House (Rotterdam), dedicated to celebrating Erasmus's legacy. Three moments in Erasmus's life are celebrated annually. On 1 April, the city celebrates the publication of his best-known book \"The Praise of Folly\". On 11 July, the \"Night of Erasmus\" celebrates the lasting influence of his work. His birthday is celebrated on 28 October.\nErasmus's reputation and the interpretations of his work have varied over time. Moderate Catholics recognized him as a leading figure in attempts to reform the Church, while Protestants recognized his initial support for Luther's ideas and the groundwork he laid for the future Reformation, especially in biblical scholarship. By the 1560s, however, there was a marked change in reception.\nAccording to Franz Anton Knittel, Erasmus in his \"Novum Instrumentum omne\" did not incorporate the \"Comma\" from the Codex Montfortianus (concerning the Trinity), because of grammar differences, but used the Complutensian Polyglot. According to him the \"Comma\" was known to Tertullian.\nProtestant views of Erasmus fluctuated depending on region and period, with continual support in his native Netherlands and in cities of the Upper Rhine area. However, following his death and in the late sixteenth century, many Reformation supporters saw Erasmus's critiques of Luther and lifelong support for the universal Catholic Church as damning, and second-generation Protestants were less vocal in their debts to the great humanist. Nevertheless, his reception is demonstrable among Swiss Protestants in the sixteenth century: he had an indelible influence on the biblical commentaries of, for example, Konrad Pellikan, Heinrich Bullinger, and John Calvin, all of whom used both his annotations on the New Testament and his paraphrases of same in their own New Testament commentaries.\nHowever, Erasmus designated his own legacy, and his life works were turned over at his death to his friend the Protestant humanist turned remonstrator Sebastian Castellio for the repair of the breach and divide of Christianity in its Catholic, Anabaptist, and Protestant branches.\nBy the coming of the Age of Enlightenment, however, Erasmus increasingly again became a more widely respected cultural symbol and was hailed as an important figure by increasingly broad groups. In a letter to a friend, Erasmus once had written: \"That you are patriotic will be praised by many and easily forgiven by everyone; but in my opinion it is wiser to treat men and things as though we held this world the common fatherland of all.\" Thus, the universalist ideals of Erasmus are sometimes claimed to be important for fixing global governance.\nSeveral schools, faculties and universities in the Netherlands and Belgium are named after him, as is Erasmus Hall in Brooklyn, New York, USA.The European Union's Erasmus Programme scholarships enable students to spend up to a year of their university courses in a university in another European country.\nEramus is credited with saying \"When I get a little money I buy books; and if any is left, I buy food and clothes.\"\nHe is also blamed for the mistranslation from Greek of \"to call a bowl a bowl\" as \"to call a spade a spade\"."}
{"id": "10153", "revid": "27128261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10153", "title": "Encyclopedia Brown", "text": "Encyclopedia Brown is a series of books featuring the adventures of boy detective Leroy Brown, nicknamed \"Encyclopedia\" for his intelligence and range of knowledge. The series of 29 children's novels was written (one co-written) by Donald J. Sobol, with the first book published in 1963 and the last novel published posthumously in 2012. The Encyclopedia Brown series has spawned a comic strip, a TV series, and compilation books of puzzles and games.\nSobol's first \"Encyclopedia Brown\" book was written in two weeks; subsequent books took about six months to write. Its main publisher was Bantam Skylark.\nStyle.\nEach book in the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" mystery series is self-contained in that the reader is not required to have read earlier books in order to understand the stories. The major characters, settings, etc. are usually introduced (or reintroduced) in each book.\nBooks featuring Brown are subdivided into a number\u2014usually ten or more\u2014of (possibly interlinked) short stories, each of which presents a mystery. The mysteries are intended to be solved by the reader, thanks to the placement of a logical or factual inconsistency somewhere within the text. This is very similar to the layout of Donald Sobol's other book series, \"Two-Minute Mysteries\". Many of the mysteries involve Brown helping his father, the local police chief, solve a crime; Brown outwitting town bully Bugs Meany, the leader of a gang known as the Tigers; or Brown being aided by Sally Kimball, his partner, close friend, and bodyguard. Brown, his father, or Sally invariably solves the case by exposing this inconsistency, detailed in the \"Answers\" section in the back of the book.\nComic strip.\nFrom December 3, 1978, to September 20, 1980, \"Encyclopedia Brown\" was a daily and Sunday comic strip syndicated by Universal Press Syndicate. The artwork was done by Frank Bolle, and Donald J. Sobol was credited as the writer.\nLegacy.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books experienced some enduring popularity.\nIn 1976, the Mystery Writers of America honored Sobol and his Encyclopedia Brown series with a special Edgar Award.\nEducators have used Encyclopedia Brown in classrooms to instruct students in skills such as writing reports. In 1986, the Society for Visual Education, Inc. published a filmstrip series, produced and written by Lynne V. Gibbs, with accompanying audio cassette tapes and workbooks for elementary and middle schools' use. The following four Encyclopedia Brown stories were utilized: \"The Case of the Missing Statue, The Case of the Happy Nephew, The Case of the Kidnapped Pigs\", and \"The Case of the Marble Shooter\". According to WorldCat's library catalog listing, \"As super-sleuth Encyclopedia Brown solves four mysteries, he shows students how he fills out his reports, including selecting a topic, gathering information, taking notes, making an outline, and revising and editing.\"\nAdaptations.\nTV series on HBO.\nA live action television series adaptation, also called \"Encyclopedia Brown\", ran on HBO starting in 1989. Scott Bremner played the title role, with Laura Bridge playing Sally. The series ran over 8 episodes. It was produced by Howard David Deutsch and directed by Savage Steve Holland. Parts of the series were filmed in Provo, Utah.\nThe series began with an hour-long special, \"The Case of the Missing Time Capsule\", and subsequent six episodes were 30 minutes long.\nMany of these episodes were later released on VHS.\nFilm.\nIn June 2013, Warner Bros. optioned the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books into a feature film. Matt Johnson was in talks to write the movie. Roy Lee and Howard David Deutsch (producer of the 1989 \"Encyclopedia Brown\" TV series) and Jonathan Zakin were announced as producing.\nBooks.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books, in order of publication (parentheses indicate numbers on original release cover art):\nSolve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes.\nFrom January 15 to June 30, 1989, a special Solve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes was held in conjunction with the Encyclopedia Brown books and Bantam Books. In the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\", Sobol presented an unsolved mystery for the contestant to solve and submit an answer for a chance to win a prize. The mystery for the contest was called \"The Case of the Missing Birthday Gift\", wherein Encyclopedia had to solve the case of a stolen bicycle that was given as a birthday gift to Willie Grant on his tenth birthday. The Tigers make an appearance as the suspects in the case; Bugs Meany, Jack Beck, and Rocky Graham all show up at the Tigers' clubhouse.\nContestants were allowed to enter as many times as they wished, provided they used a separate envelope for each entry. The sweepstakes was only available to USA and Canada residents. No purchase was necessary, as one could either use the official form in the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\" or send in a 3\" by 5\" index card with the solution and the contestant's contact information.\nParodies and tributes.\nThe satirical newspaper \"The Onion\" ran an article in 2003 titled \"Idaville Detective 'Encyclopedia' Brown Found Dead In Library Dumpster\", which stated that Encyclopedia Brown, now a middle-aged police detective, had been murdered. The article parodied the books' tendency to have crimes solved through knowledge of trivia, and ended with Bugs Meany, who was now police commissioner, stating that he had an alibi for the murder in that \"I was at the North Pole watching the penguins.\"\nEd Brubaker and Sean Phillips' \"Criminal: Last of the Innocent\" graphic novel features a reference to Encyclopedia Brown, with a grown-up analogue of Encyclopedia featured in the comic, as confirmed by Ed Brubaker himself.\nThe Das Racist song \"Rainbow in the Dark\" features the lyric \"Wikipedia Brown\" as a reference to Encyclopedia Brown.\nIn , there is a fictional book series called \"Sherlock Sammy Does It Again\" and the protagonist is Sherlock Sammy and it includes twenty short stories.\nThe protagonist of the 2020 film The Kid Detective is a former child prodigy detective, now an unsuccessful adult, living in a small town.\nIn \"The Simpsons\" episode \"500 Keys\", the grave of Encyclopedia Brown is shown briefly next to those of Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys, to which Lisa comments \"Jeez, they're dropping like flies\"."}
{"id": "10156", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10156", "title": "Evolved", "text": ""}
{"id": "10158", "revid": "20306027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10158", "title": "Empire", "text": "An empire is a sovereign state consisting of several territories and peoples subject to a single ruling authority, often an emperor. States can be empires either by narrow definition through having an emperor and being named as such, or by broad definition as stated above in being an aggregated realm under the rule of a supreme authority.\nAn empire can be made solely of contiguous territories, such as the Austro-Hungarian Empire or the Russian Empire, or include territories which are far remote from the 'home' country of the empire, such as a colonial empire. Aside from the more formal usage, the word \"empire\" can also refer colloquially to a large-scale business enterprise (e.g. a transnational corporation), a political organisation controlled by a single individual (a political boss), or a group (political bosses). The concept of \"empire\" is associated with other such concepts as \"imperialism\", \"colonialism\", and \"globalization\", with imperialism referring to the creation and maintenance of unequal relationships between nations and not necessarily the policy of a state headed by an emperor or empress. Empire is often used as a term to describe displeasure to overpowering situations.\nThere are two main ways to establish and maintain an imperial political structure: (i) as a territorial empire of direct conquest and control with force or (ii) as a coercive, hegemonic empire of indirect conquest and control with power. The former method provides greater tribute and direct political control, yet limits further expansion because it absorbs military forces to fixed garrisons. The latter method provides less tribute and indirect control, but avails military forces for further expansion. Territorial empires (e.g. the Mongol Empire and Abbasid Caliphate) tend to be contiguous areas. The term, on occasion, has been applied to maritime republics or thalassocracies (e.g. the Athenian and British empires) with looser structures and more scattered territories, often consisting of many islands and other forms of possessions which required the creation and maintenance of a powerful navy. Empires such the Holy Roman Empire also came together by electing the emperor with votes from member realms through the Imperial election.\nDefinition.\nAn empire is an aggregate of many separate states or territories under a supreme ruler or oligarchy. This is in contrast to a federation, which is an extensive state voluntarily composed of autonomous states and peoples. An empire is a large polity which rules over territories outside of its original borders.\nDefinitions of what physically and politically constitute an empire vary. It might be a state affecting imperial policies or a particular political structure. Empires are typically formed from diverse ethnic, national, cultural, and religious components. 'Empire' and 'colonialism' are used to refer to relationships between a powerful state or society versus a less powerful one; Michael W. Doyle has defined empire as \"effective control, whether formal or informal, of a subordinated society by an imperial society\".\nTom Nairn and Paul James define empires as polities that \"extend relations of power across territorial spaces over which they have no prior or given legal sovereignty, and where, in one or more of the domains of economics, politics, and culture, they gain some measure of extensive hegemony over those spaces for the purpose of extracting or accruing value\". Rein Taagepera has defined an empire as \"any relatively large sovereign political entity whose components are not sovereign\".\nThe terrestrial empire's maritime analogue is the thalassocracy, an empire composed of islands and coasts which are accessible to its terrestrial homeland, such as the Athenian-dominated Delian League.\nFurthermore, empires can expand by both land and sea. Stephen Howe notes that empires by land can be characterized by expansion over terrain, \"extending directly outwards from the original frontier\" while an empire by sea can be characterized by colonial expansion and empire building \"by an increasingly powerful navy\".\nHowever, sometimes an empire is only a semantic construction, such as when a ruler assumes the title of \"emperor\". That polity over which the ruler reigns logically becomes an \"empire\", despite having no additional territory or hegemony. Examples of this form of empire are the Central African Empire, or the Korean Empire proclaimed in 1897 when Korea, far from gaining new territory, was on the verge of being annexed by the Empire of Japan, one of the last to use the name officially. Among the last states in the 20th century known as empires in this sense were the Central African Empire, Ethiopia, Empire of Vietnam, Manchukuo, Russia, Germany, and Korea.\nCharacteristics.\nEmpires originated as different types of states, although they commonly began as powerful monarchies. Ideas about empires have changed over time, ranging from public approval to universal distaste. Empires are built out of separate units with some kind of diversity \u2013 ethnic, national, cultural, religious \u2013 and imply at least some inequality between the rulers and the ruled. Without this inequality, the system would be seen as a commonwealth. Throughout history, the major powers of the world constantly seek to conquer other parts of the world. Imperialism is the idea of a major power controlling another nation or land with the intentions to use the native people and resources to help the mother country in any way possible. Many empires were the result of military conquest, incorporating the vanquished states into a political union, but imperial hegemony can be established in other ways. The Athenian Empire, the Roman Empire, and the British Empire developed at least in part under elective auspices. The Empire of Brazil declared itself an empire after separating from the Portuguese Empire in 1822. France has twice transitioned from being called the French Republic to being called the French Empire while it retained an overseas empire.\nEuropeans began applying the designation of \"empire\" to non-European monarchies, such as the Qing Empire and the Mughal Empire, as well as the Maratha Empire, eventually leading to the looser denotations applicable to any political structure meeting the criteria of \"imperium\". Some monarchies styled themselves as having greater size, scope, and power than the territorial, politico-military, and economic facts support. As a consequence, some monarchs assumed the title of \"emperor\" (or its corresponding translation, \"tsar\", \"empereur\", \"kaiser\", \"shah\" etc.) and renamed their states as \"The Empire of ...\". Empires were seen as an expanding power, administration, ideas and beliefs followed by cultural habits from place to place. Empires tend to impose their culture on the subject states to strengthen the imperial structure. This can have notable effects that outlast the empire itself, both positive and negative. Most histories of empires have been hostile, especially if the authors were promoting nationalism. Stephen Howe, although himself hostile, listed positive qualities: the guaranteed stability, security, and legal order for their subjects. They tried to minimize ethnic and religious antagonism inside the empire. The aristocracies that ruled them were often more cosmopolitan and broad-minded than their nationalistic successors.\nHistory of imperialism.\nFor comprehensive historical coverage see Peter Stearns, ed. \"The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged\" (6th ed. 2001).\nBronze and Iron Age empires.\nThe earliest known empire appeared in southern Egypt sometime around 3200 BC. Southern Egypt was divided by three kingdoms each centered on a powerful city. Hierapolis conquered the other two cities over two centuries, and later grew into the country of Egypt. The Akkadian Empire, established by Sargon of Akkad (24th century BC), was an early all-Mesopotamian empire. This imperial achievement was repeated by Hammurabi of Babylon in the 17th century BC. In the 15th century BC, the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, ruled by Thutmose III, was ancient Africa's major force upon incorporating Nubia and the ancient city-states of the Levant.\nCirca 1500 BC in China rose the Shang Empire which was succeeded by the Zhou Empire circa 1100 BC. Both surpassed in territory their contemporary Near Eastern empires. The Zhou Empire dissolved in 770 BC into feudal multi-state system which lasted for five and a half centuries until the universal conquest of Qin in 221 BC. The first empire comparable to Rome in organization was the Neo-Assyrian Empire (916\u2013612 BC). The Median Empire was the first empire within the territory of Persia. By the 6th century BC, after having allied with the Babylonians to defeat the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Medes were able to establish their own empire, which was the largest of its day and lasted for about sixty years.\nClassical period.\nThe Axial Age (mid-First Millennium BC) witnessed unprecedented imperial expansion in the Indo-Mediterranean region and China. The successful and extensive Achaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BC), also known as the first Persian Empire, covered Mesopotamia, Egypt, parts of Greece, Thrace, the Middle East, much of Central Asia, and North-Western India. It is considered the first great empire in history or the first \"world empire\". It was overthrown and replaced by the short-lived empire of Alexander the Great. His Empire was succeeded by three Empires ruled by the Diadochi\u2014the Seleucid, Ptolemaic, and Macedonian, which, despite being independent, are called the \"Hellenistic Empire\" by virtue of their similarities in culture and administration.\nMeanwhile, in the western Mediterranean the Empires of Carthage and Rome began their rise. Having decisively defeated Carthage in 202 BC, Rome defeated Macedonia in 200 BC and the Seleucids in 190\u2013189 BC to establish an all-Mediterranean Empire. The Seleucid Empire broke apart and its former eastern part was absorbed by the Parthian Empire. In 30 BC Rome annexed Ptolemaic Egypt.\nIn India during the Axial Age appeared the Maurya Empire\u2014a geographically extensive and powerful empire, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185 BC. The empire was founded in 322 BC by Chandragupta Maurya through the help of Chanakya, who rapidly expanded his power westward across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers following the withdrawal by Alexander the Great. By 320 BC, the Maurya Empire had fully occupied northwestern India as well as defeating and conquering the satraps left by Alexander. Under Emperor Asoka the Great, the Maurya Empire became the first Indian empire to conquer the whole Indian Peninsula \u2014 an achievement repeated only twice, by the Gupta and Mughal Empires. In the reign of Asoka Buddhism spread to become the dominant religion in many parts of the ancient India.\nIn 221 BC, China became an empire when the State of Qin ended the chaotic Warring States period through its conquest of the other six states and proclaimed the Qin Empire (221\u2013207 BC). The Qin Empire is known for the construction of the Great Wall of China and the Terracotta Army, as well as the standardization of currency, weights, measures and writing system. It laid the foundation for China's first golden age, the Han Empire (202 BC\u2013AD 9, AD 25\u2013220). The Han Empire expanded into Central Asia and established trade through the Silk Road. Confucianism was, for the first time, adopted as an official state ideology. During the reign of the Emperor Wu of Han, the Xiongnu were pacified. By this time, only four empires stretched between the Pacific and the Atlantic: the Han Empire of China, the Kushan Empire, the Parthian Empire of Persia, and the Roman Empire. The collapse of the Han Empire in AD 220 saw China fragmented into the Three Kingdoms, only to be unified once again by the Jin Empire (AD 266\u2013420). The relative weakness of the Jin Empire plunged China into political disunity that would last from AD 304 to AD 589 when the Sui Empire (AD 581\u2013618) reunited China.\nThe Romans were the first people to invent and embody the concept of empire in their two mandates: to wage war and to make and execute laws. They were the most extensive Western empire until the early modern period, and left a lasting impact on European society. Many languages, cultural values, religious institutions, political divisions, urban centers, and legal systems can trace their origins to the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire governed and rested on exploitative actions. They took slaves and money from the peripheries to support the imperial center. However, the absolute reliance on conquered peoples to carry out the empire's fortune, sustain wealth, and fight wars would ultimately lead to the collapse of the Roman Empire. The Romans were strong believers in what they called their \"civilizing mission\". This term was legitimized and justified by writers like Cicero who wrote that only under Roman rule could the world flourish and prosper. This ideology, that was envisioned to bring a new world order, was eventually spread across the Mediterranean world and beyond. People started to build houses like Romans, eat the same food, wear the same clothes and engage in the same games. Even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not born within Roman territory.\nThe Latin word \"imperium\", referring to a magistrate's power to command, gradually assumed the meaning \"The territory in which a magistrate can effectively enforce his commands\", while the term \"imperator\" was originally an honorific meaning \"commander\". The title was given to generals who were victorious in battle. Thus, an \"empire\" may include regions that are not legally within the territory of a state, but are under either direct or indirect control of that state, such as a colony, client state, or protectorate. Although historians use the terms \"Republican Period\" and \"Imperial Period\" to identify the periods of Roman history before and after absolute power was assumed by Augustus, the Romans themselves continued to refer to their government as a republic, and during the Republican Period, the territories controlled by the republic were referred to as \"Imperium Romanum\". The emperor's actual legal power derived from holding the office of \"consul\", but he was traditionally honored with the titles of \"imperator\" (commander) and \"princeps\" (first man or, chief). Later, these terms came to have legal significance in their own right; an army calling their general \"imperator\" was a direct challenge to the authority of the current emperor.\nThe legal systems of France and its former colonies are strongly influenced by Roman law. Similarly, the United States was founded on a model inspired by the Roman Republic, with upper and lower legislative assemblies, and executive power vested in a single individual, the president. The president, as \"commander-in-chief\" of the armed forces, reflects the ancient Roman titles \"imperator princeps\". The Roman Catholic Church, founded in the early Imperial Period, spread across Europe, first by the activities of Christian evangelists, and later by official imperial promulgation.\nPost-classical period.\nIn Western Asia, the term \"Persian Empire\" came to denote the Iranian imperial states established at different historical periods of pre\u2013Islamic and post\u2013Islamic Persia.\nIn East Asia, various Chinese empires dominated the political, economic and cultural landscapes during this era, the most powerful of which was probably the Tang Empire (618\u2013690, 705\u2013907). Other influential Chinese empires during the post-classical period include the Sui Empire (581\u2013618), the Great Liao Empire (916\u20131125), the Song Empire (960\u20131279), the Western Xia Empire (1038\u20131227), the Great Jin Empire (1115\u20131234), the Western Liao Empire (1124\u20131218), the Great Yuan Empire (1271\u20131368), and the Great Ming Empire (1368\u20131644). During this period, Japan and Korea underwent voluntary Sinicization. The Sui, Tang and Song empires had the world's largest economy and were the most technologically advanced during their time; the Great Yuan Empire was the world's ninth largest empire by total land area; while the Great Ming Empire is famous for the seven maritime expeditions led by Zheng He.\nThe 7th century saw the emergence of the Islamic Empire, also referred to as the Islamic Caliphate. The Rashidun Caliphate expanded from the Arabian Peninsula and swiftly conquered the Persian Empire and much of the Byzantine Roman Empire. Its successor state, the Umayyad Caliphate, expanded across North Africa and into the Iberian Peninsula. By the beginning of the 8th century, the Umayyad Caliphate had become the largest empire in history, it would not be surpassed in size until the establishment of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century. In 750 the Caliphate clashed with the Tang China at Talas. By this time only these two Empires stretched between the Atlantic and the Pacific. From the 11th century Moroccan empires began to appear, starting with the Almoravid Empire, dominating territories in both Europe as well as Sub-Saharan Africa.\nThe Ajuran Sultanate was a Somali empire in the medieval times that dominated the Indian Ocean trade. They belonged to the Somali Muslim sultanate that ruled over large parts of the Horn of Africa in the Middle Ages. Through a strong centralized administration and an aggressive military stance towards invaders, the Ajuran Sultanate successfully resisted an Oromo invasion from the west and a Portuguese incursion from the east during the Gaal Madow and the Ajuran-Portuguese wars. Trading routes dating from the ancient and early medieval periods of Somali maritime enterprise were strengthened or re-established, and foreign trade and commerce in the coastal provinces flourished with ships sailing to and coming from many kingdoms and empires in East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Europe, Middle East, North Africa and East Africa.\nIn the 7th century, Maritime Southeast Asia witnessed the rise of a Buddhist thallasocracy, the Srivijaya Empire, which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the Hindu-Buddhist Majapahit Empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries. In the Southeast Asian mainland, the Hindu-Buddhist Khmer Empire was centered in the city of Angkor and flourished from the 9th to 13th centuries. Following the demise of the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Empire flourished alongside the Burmese and Lan Chang Empires from the 13th through the 18th centuries.\nIn Southeastern and Eastern Europe, during the year of 917, the Eastern Roman Empire, sometimes called Byzantine Empire, was forced to recognize the Imperial title of Bulgarian ruler Simeon the Great, who were then called Tsar, the first ruler to hold that precise imperial title. The Bulgarian Empire, establishes in the region in 680/681, remained a major power in Southeast Europe until its fall in the late 14th century. Bulgaria gradually reached its cultural and territorial apogee in the 9th century and early 10th century under Prince Boris I and Simeon I, when its early Christianization in 864 allowed it to develop into the cultural and literary center of Slavic Europe, as well as one of the largest states in Europe, thus the period is considered the Golden Age of medieval Bulgarian culture. Major events included the development of the Cyrillic script at the Preslav Literary School, declared official in 893, and the establishment of the liturgy in Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian.\nAt the time, in the Medieval West, the title \"empire\" had a specific technical meaning that was exclusively applied to states that considered themselves the heirs and successors of the Roman Empire. Among these were the \"Byzantine Empire\", which was the actual continuation of the Eastern portion of the Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire, the largely Germanic Holy Roman Empire, and the Russian Empire. Yet, these states did not always fit the geographic, political, or military profiles of empires in the modern sense of the word. To legitimise their \"imperium\", these states directly claimed the title of \"Empire\" from Rome. The \"sacrum Romanum imperium\" (Holy Roman Empire), which lasted from 800 to 1806, claimed to have exclusively comprehended Christian principalities, and was only nominally a discrete imperial state. The Holy Roman Empire was not always centrally-governed, as it had neither core nor peripheral territories, and was not governed by a central, politico-military elite. Hence, Voltaire's remark that the Holy Roman Empire \"was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire\" is accurate to the degree that it ignores German rule over Italian, French, Proven\u00e7al, Polish, Flemish, Dutch, and Bohemian populations, and the efforts of the ninth-century Holy Roman Emperors (i.e., the Ottonians) to establish central control. Voltaire's \"nor an empire\" observation applies to its late period.\nIn 1204, after the Fourth Crusade conquered Constantinople, the crusaders established a Latin Empire (1204\u20131261) in that city, while the defeated Byzantine Empire's descendants established two smaller, short-lived empires in Asia Minor: the Empire of Nicaea (1204\u20131261) and the Empire of Trebizond (1204\u20131461). \nConstantinople was retaken in 1261 by the Byzantine successor state centered in Nicaea, re-establishing the Byzantine Empire until 1453, by which time the Turkish-Muslim Ottoman Empire (ca. 1300\u20131918), had conquered most of the region. The Ottoman Empire was a successor of the Abbasid Empire and it was the most powerful empire to succeed the Abbasi empires at the time, as well as one of the most powerful empires in the world. The Ottoman Empire centered on modern day Turkey, dominated the eastern Mediterranean, overthrew the Byzantine Empire to claim Constantinople and it would start battering at Austria and Malta, which were countries that were key to central and to south-west Europe respectively \u2014 mainly for their geographical location. The reason these occurrences of batterings were so important was because the Ottomans were Muslim, and the rest of Europe was Christian, so there was a sense of religious fighting going on. This was not just a rivalry of East and West but a rivalry between Christians and Muslims. Both the Christians and Muslims had alliances with other countries, and they had problems in them as well. The flows of trade and of cultural influences across the supposed great divide never ceased, so the countries never stopped bartering with each other. These epochal clashes between civilizations profoundly shaped many people's thinking back then, and continues to do so in the present day. Modern hatred against Muslim communities in South-Eastern Europe, mainly in Bosnia and Kosovo, has often been articulated in terms of seeing them as unwelcome residues of this imperialism: in short, as Turks. Moreover, Eastern Orthodox imperialism was not re-established until the coronation of Peter the Great as Emperor of Russia in 1721. Likewise, with the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815), the Austrian Empire (1804\u20131867) emerged reconstituted as the Empire of Austria-Hungary (1867\u20131918), having \"inherited\" the imperium of Central and Western Europe from the losers of said wars.\nIn the thirteenth century, Genghis Khan expanded the Mongol Empire to be the largest contiguous empire in the world. However, within two generations, the empire was separated into four discrete khanates under Genghis Khan's grandsons. One of them, Kublai Khan, conquered China and established the Yuan dynasty with the imperial capital at Beijing. One family ruled the whole Eurasian land mass from the Pacific to the Adriatic and Baltic Seas. The emergence of the Pax Mongolica had significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia. The Safavid Empire of Iran was also founded.\nThe Age of the Islamic Gunpowders started to develop from the 15th century.\nIn the Indian subcontinent, the Delhi Sultanate conquered most of the Indian peninsula and spread Islam across it. It later got broken with the establishment of the Bengal Sultanate. In the 15th century, the Mughal Empire was founded by Timur and Genghis Khan's direct descendant Babur. His successors such Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan extended the empire. Meanwhile, the Sur Empire was also established in the north by Sher Shah Suri.\nIn the 17th century, Muhammad Aurangzeb Alamgir expanded the Mughal Empire, controlling most of the South Asia through Sharia, which became the world's largest economy and leading manufacturing power with a nominal GDP that valued a quarter of world GDP, superior than the combination of Europe's GDP. It has been estimated that the Mughal emperors controlled an unprecedented one-fourth of the world's entire economy and was home to one-fourth of the world's population at the time.\nAfter the death of Aurangzeb, which marks the end of the medieval India and the beginning of European invasion in India, the empire was weakened by Nader Shah's invasion.\nThe Mysore Empire was soon established by Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, allies of Napoleone Bonaparte. Other independent empires were also been established, such as those ruled by the Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad and Hyderabad State's Nizam of Hyderabad.\nIn the pre-Columbian Americas, two Empires were prominent\u2014the Azteca in Mesoamerica and Inca in Peru. Both existed for several generations before the arrival of the Europeans. Inca had gradually conquered the whole of the settled Andean world as far south as today Santiago in Chile.\nIn Oceania, the Tonga Empire was a lonely empire that existed from the Late Middle Ages to the Modern period.\nColonial empires.\nIn the 15th century, Castile (Spain) landing in the so-called \"New World\" (first, the Americas, and later Australia), along with Portuguese travels around the Cape of Good Hope and along the coast of Africa bordering the southeast Indian Ocean, proved ripe opportunities for the continent's Renaissance-era monarchies to establish colonial empires like those of the ancient Romans and Greeks. In the Old World, colonial imperialism was attempted and established on the Canary Islands and Ireland. These conquered lands and people became \"de jure\" subordinates of the empire, rather than \"de facto\" imperial territories and subjects. Such subjugation often elicited \"client-state\" resentment that the empire unwisely ignored, leading to the collapse of the European colonial imperial system in the late 19th through the mid-20th century. Portuguese discovery of Newfoundland in the New World gave way to many expeditions led by England (later Britain), Spain, France, and the Dutch Republic. In the 18th century, the Spanish Empire was at its height because of the great mass of goods taken from conquered territory in the Americas (nowadays Mexico, parts of the United States, the Caribbean, most of Central America, and South America) and the Philippines.\nModern period.\nThe British established their first empire (1583\u20131783) in North America by colonising lands that made up British America, including parts of Canada, the Caribbean and the Thirteen Colonies. In 1776, the Continental Congress of the Thirteen Colonies declared itself independent from the British Empire, thus beginning the American Revolution. Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa, with subsequent exploration leading to the rise of the Second British Empire (1783\u20131815), which was followed by the Industrial Revolution and Britain's Imperial Century (1815\u20131914). It became the largest empire in world history, encompassing one quarter of the world's land area and one fifth of its population. The impacts of this period are still prominent in the current age \"including widespread use of the English language, belief in Protestant religion, economic globalization, modern precepts of law and order, and representative democracy.\"\nThe Great Qing Empire of China (1636\u20131912) was the fifth largest empire in world history by total land area, and laid the foundation for the modern territorial claims of both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China. Apart from having direct control over much of East Asia, the empire also exerted domination over other states through the Chinese tributary system. The multiethnic and multicultural nature of the Great Qing Empire was crucial to the subsequent birth of the nationalistic concept of \"zhonghua minzu\". The empire reached its peak during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor, after which the empire entered a period of prolonged decline, culminating in its collapse as a result of the Xinhai Revolution.\nThe Ashanti Empire (or Confederacy), also Asanteman (1701\u20131896), was a West African state of the Ashanti, the Akan people of the Ashanti Region, Akanland in modern-day Ghana. The Ashanti (or Asante) were a powerful, militaristic and highly disciplined people in West Africa. Their military power, which came from effective strategy and an early adoption of European firearms, created an empire that stretched from central Akanland (in modern-day Ghana) to present day Benin and Ivory Coast, bordered by the Dagomba kingdom to the north and Dahomey to the east. Due to the empire's military prowess, sophisticated hierarchy, social stratification and culture, the Ashanti empire had one of the largest historiographies of any indigenous Sub-Saharan African political entity.\nThe Sikh Empire (1799\u20131846) was established in the Punjab region of India. The empire collapsed when its founder, Ranjit Singh, died and its army fell to the British. During the same period, the Maratha Empire (also known as the Maratha Confederacy) was a Hindu state located in present-day India. It existed from 1674 to 1818, and at its peak, the empire's territories covered much of Southern Asia. The empire was founded and consolidated by Shivaji. After the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, it expanded greatly under the rule of the Peshwas. In 1761, the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat, which halted the expansion of the empire. Later, the empire was divided into a confederacy of states which, in 1818, were lost to the British during the Anglo-Maratha wars.\nThe French emperors Napoleon I and Napoleon III (See: Premier Empire, Second French Empire) each attempted establishing a western imperial hegemony centered in France. The French colonial empire constituted the overseas colonies, protectorates and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward. A distinction is generally made between the \"first colonial empire,\" that existed until 1814, and the \"second colonial empire\", which began with the conquest of Algiers in 1830. The second colonial empire came to an end after the decolonizations of Indochina (1954), Algeria (1962) and French Africa. At its apex, it was one of the largest empires in history; including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached 11,500,000 km2 (4,400,000 sq mi), with a population of 110 million people in 1939.\nThe Empire of Brazil (1822\u20131889) was the only South American modern monarchy, established by the heir of the Portuguese Empire as an independent nation eventually became an emerging international power. The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse. In 1889 the monarchy was overthrown in a sudden coup d'\u00e9tat led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic.\nThe German Empire (1871\u20131918), another \"heir to the Holy Roman Empire\", arose in 1871.\nThe term \"American Empire\" refers to the United States' cultural ideologies and foreign policy strategies. The term is most commonly used to describe the U.S.'s status since the 20th century, but it can also be applied to the United States' world standing before the rise of nationalism in the 20th century. The United States is not traditionally recognized as an empire, in part because the U.S. adopted a different political system from those that previous empires had used. Despite these systematic differences, the political objectives and strategies of the United States government have been quite similar to those of previous empires. Due to this similarity some scholars confess: \"When it walks like a duck, talks like a duck, it's a duck.\" Academic, Krishna Kumar, argues the distinct principles of nationalism and imperialism may result in common practice; that is, the pursuit of nationalism can often coincide with the pursuit of imperialism in terms of strategy and decision making. Throughout the 19th century, the United States government attempted to expand its territory by any means necessary. Regardless of the supposed motivation for this constant expansion, all of these land acquisitions were carried out by imperialistic means. This was done by financial means in some cases, and by military force in others. Most notably, the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Texas Annexation (1845), and the Mexican Cession (1848) highlight the imperialistic goals of the United States during this \u201cmodern period\u201d of imperialism. The U.S. government has stopped adding additional territories, where they permanently and politically take over since the early 20th century, and instead have established 800 military bases as their outposts. With this overt but subtile military control of other countries, scholars consider U.S. foreign policy strategies to be imperialistic. This idea is explored in the \"contemporary usage\" section.\nTransition from empire.\nIn time, an empire may change from one political entity to another. For example, the Holy Roman Empire, a German re-constitution of the Roman Empire, metamorphosed into various political structures (i.e., federalism), and eventually, under Habsburg rule, re-constituted itself in 1804 as the Austrian Empire, an empire of much different politics and scope, which in turn became the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1867. The Roman Empire, perennially reborn, also lived on as the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire) \u2013 temporarily splitting into the Latin Empire, the Empire of Nicaea and the Empire of Trebizond before its remaining territory and centre became part of the Ottoman Empire. A similarly persistent concept of empire saw the Mongol Empire become the Khanate of the Golden Horde, the Yuan Empire of China, and the Ilkhanate before resurrection as the Timurid Empire and as the Mughal Empire. After 1945 the Empire of Japan retained its Emperor but lost its colonial possessions and became the State of Japan.\nAn autocratic empire can become a republic (e.g., the Central African Empire in 1979), or it can become a republic with its imperial dominions reduced to a core territory (e.g., Weimar Germany shorn of the German colonial empire (1918\u20131919), or the Ottoman Empire (1918\u20131923)). The dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire after 1918 provides an example of a multi-ethnic superstate broken into constituent nation-oriented states: the republics, kingdoms, and provinces of Austria, Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Czechoslovakia, Ruthenia, Galicia, \"et al\". In the aftermath of World War I the Russian Empire also broke up and became reduced to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) before re-forming as the USSR (1922\u20131991) \u2013 sometimes seen as the core of a Soviet Empire.\nAfter the Second World War (1939\u20131945), the deconstruction of colonial empires quickened and became commonly known as decolonisation. The British Empire evolved into a loose, multinational Commonwealth of Nations, while the French colonial empire metamorphosed to a Francophone commonwealth. The same process happened to the Portuguese Empire, which evolved into a Lusophone commonwealth, and to the former territories of the extinct Spanish Empire, which alongside the Lusophone countries of Portugal and Brazil, created an Ibero-American commowealth. France returned the French territory of Kwang-Chou-Wan to China in 1946. The British gave Hong Kong back to China in 1997 after 150 years of rule. The Portuguese territory of Macau reverted to China in 1999. Macau and Hong Kong did not become part of the provincial structure of China; they have autonomous systems of government as Special Administrative Regions of the People's Republic of China.\nFrance still governs overseas territories (French Guiana, Martinique, R\u00e9union, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Saint Martin, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Guadeloupe, TAAF, Wallis and Futuna, Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, and Mayotte), and exerts hegemony in Francophone Africa (29 francophone countries such as Chad, Rwanda, \"et cetera\"). Fourteen British Overseas Territories remain under British sovereignty. Sixteen countries of the Commonwealth of Nations share their head of state, Queen Elizabeth II, as Commonwealth Realms.\nIn 2004 Eliot A. Cohen summarized the contemporary transition from empire: \"The Age of Empire may indeed have ended, but then an age of American hegemony has begun, regardless of what one calls it.\"\nFall of empires.\nRoman Empire.\nThe fall of the western half of the Roman Empire is seen as one of the most pivotal points in all of human history. This event traditionally marks the transition from classical civilization to the birth of Europe. The Roman Empire started to decline at the end of the reign of the last of the Five Good Emperors, Marcus Aurelius in 161\u2013180 A.D. There is still a debate over the cause of the fall of one of the largest empires in history. Piganiol argues that the Roman Empire under its authority can be described as \"a period of terror\", holding its imperial system accountable for its failure. Another theory blames the rise of Christianity as the cause, arguing that the spread of certain Christian ideals caused internal weakness of the military and state. In the book \"The Fall of the Roman Empire\", by Peter Heather, he contends that there are many factors, including issues of money and manpower, which produce military limitations and culminate in the Roman army's inability to effectively repel invading barbarians at the frontier. The Western Roman economy was already stretched to its limit in the 4th and 5th Centuries C.E. due to continual conflict and loss of territory which, in turn, generated loss of revenue from the tax base. There was also the looming presence of the Persians which, at any time, took a large percentage of the fighting force's attention. At the same time the Huns, a nomadic warrior people from the steppes of Asia, are also putting extreme pressure on the German tribes outside of the Roman frontier, which gave the German tribes no other choice, geographically, but to move into Roman territory. At this point, without increased funding, the Roman army could no longer effectively defend its borders against major waves of Germanic tribes. This inability is illustrated by the crushing defeat at Adrianople in 378 C.E. and, later, the Battle of Frigidus.\nContemporary usage.\nContemporaneously, the concept of \"empire\" is politically valid, yet is not always used in the traditional sense. For example, Japan is considered the world's sole remaining empire because of the continued presence of the Japanese Emperor in national politics. Despite the semantic reference to imperial power, Japan is a \"de jure\" constitutional monarchy, with a homogeneous population of 127 million people that is 98.5 percent ethnic Japanese, making it one of the largest nation-states.\nCharacterising some aspects of the United States in regards to its territorial expansion, foreign policy, and its international behaviour as \"American Empire\" is controversial but not uncommon. This characterisation is controversial because of the strong tendency in American society to reject claims of American imperialism. The initial motivations for the inception of the United States eventually led to the development of this tendency, which has been perpetuated by the country-wide obsession with this national narrative. The United States was formed because colonists did not like being under control of the British Empire. Essentially, the United States was formed in an attempt to reject imperialism. This makes it very hard for people to acknowledge America's status as an empire. This active rejection of imperialist status is not limited to high-ranking government officials, as it has been ingrained in American society throughout its entire history. As David Ludden explains, \"journalists, scholars, teachers, students, analysts, and politicians prefer to depict the U.S. as a nation pursuing its own interests and ideals\". This often results in imperialist endeavors being presented as measures taken to enhance state security. Ludden explains this phenomenon with the concept of \"ideological blinders\", which he says prevent American citizens from realizing the true nature of America's current systems and strategies. These \"ideological blinders\" that people wear have resulted in an \"invisible\" American empire of which most American citizens are unaware.\nStuart Creighton Miller posits that the public's sense of innocence about Realpolitik (cf. American exceptionalism) impairs popular recognition of US imperial conduct since it governed other countries via surrogates. These surrogates were domestically-weak, right-wing governments that would collapse without US support. Former President G. W. Bush's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, said: \"We don't seek empires. We're not imperialistic; we never have been.\" This statement directly contradicts Thomas Jefferson who, in the 1780s while awaiting the fall of the Spanish empire, said: \"till our population can be sufficiently advanced to gain it from them piece by piece\". In turn, historian Sidney Lens argues that from its inception, the US has used every means available to dominate foreign peoples and states.\nSince the European Union was formed as a polity in 1993, it has established its own currency, its own citizenship, established discrete military forces, and exercises its limited hegemony in the Mediterranean, eastern parts of Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia. The big size and high development index of the EU economy often has the ability to influence global trade regulations in its favour. The political scientist Jan Zielonka suggests that this behaviour is imperial because it coerces its neighbouring countries into adopting its \"European\" economic, legal, and political structures.\nIn his book review of \"Empire\" (2000) by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Mehmet Akif Okur posits that since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the US, the international relations determining the world's balance of power (political, economic, military) have been altered. These alterations include the intellectual (political science) trends that perceive the contemporary world's order via the re-territorrialisation of \"political space\", the re-emergence of \"classical imperialist practices\" (the \"inside\" vs. \"outside\" duality, cf. the Other), the deliberate weakening of international organisations, the restructured international economy, economic nationalism, the expanded arming of most countries, the proliferation of nuclear weapon capabilities and the politics of identity emphasizing a state's \"subjective\" perception of its place in the world, as a nation and as a civilisation. These changes constitute the \"Age of Nation Empires\"; as imperial usage, \"nation-empire\" denotes the return of geopolitical power from \"global\" power blocs to \"regional\" power blocs (i.e., centred upon a \"regional power\" state [China, EU, Russia, US, \"et al\".]) and regional multi-state power alliances (i.e., Mediterranean, Latin America, South East Asia). Nation-empire regionalism claims sovereignty over their respective (regional) political (social, economic, ideologic), cultural, and military spheres.\nTimeline of empires.\nThe chart below shows a timeline of polities that have been called empires. Dynastic changes are marked with a white line.\nTheoretical research.\nThe Seven Stages of Empire.\nThe military historian Sir John Bagot Glubb studied eleven empires starting with the Assyrians in 859 B.C. and ending with the British in 1950 A.D. Sir John determined that each followed a remarkably similar pattern from birth to demise. Spanning a period of about ten generations, each went through 7 Stages of Empire:\nGlubb noted that in all these example, the penultimate age was marked by defensiveness, pessimism, materialism, frivolity, an influx of foreigners, the Welfare State, and a weakening of religion. He attributed this decadence to an excessively long period of wealth and power, selfishness, love of money, and the loss of a sense of duty.\nMike Maloney, an economist, arrived at exactly the same conclusion but in Economic terms whilst studying the history of money. His 7 stages were:\nEmpire versus nation state.\nEmpires have been the dominant international organization in world history:\nSimilarly, Anthony Pagden, Eliot A. Cohen, Jane Burbank and Frederick Cooper estimate that \"empires have always been more frequent, more extensive political and social forms than tribal territories or nations have ever been\". Many empires endured for centuries, while the age of the ancient Egyptian, Chinese and Japanese Empires is counted in millennia. \"Most people throughout history have lived under imperial rule.\" \nPolitical scientist Hedley Bull wrote that \"in the broad sweep of human history ... the form of states system has been the exception rather than the rule\". His colleague Robert Gilpin confirmed this conclusion for the pre-modern period:\nHistorian Michael Doyle who undertook an extensive research on empires extended the observation into the modern era:\nUniversal empire.\nExpert on warfare Quincy Wright generalized on what he called \"universal empire\"\u2014empire unifying all the contemporary system:\nGerman Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck finds that the macro-historic process of imperial expansion gave rise to global history in which the formations of universal empires were most significant stages. A later group of political scientists, working on the phenomenon of the current unipolarity, in 2007 edited research on several pre-modern civilizations by experts in respective fields. The overall conclusion was that the balance of power was inherently unstable order and usually soon broke in favor of imperial order. Yet before the advent of the unipolarity, world historian Arnold Toynbee and political scientist Martin Wight had drawn the same conclusion with an unambiguous implication for the modern world:\nThe earliest thinker to approach the phenomenon of universal empire from a theoretical point of view was Polybius (2:3): \nFichte, having witnessed the battle at Jena in 1806 when Napoleon overwhelmed Prussia, described what he perceived as a deep historical trend:\nFichte's later compatriot, Geographer Alexander von Humboldt (1769\u20131859), in the mid-Nineteenth century observed a macro-historic trend of imperial growth in both Hemispheres: \"Men of great and strong minds, as well as whole nations, acted under influence of one idea, the purity of which was utterly unknown to them.\"\nThe imperial expansion filled the world circa 1900. Two famous contemporary observers\u2014Frederick Turner and Halford Mackinder described the event and drew implications, the former predicting American overseas expansion and the latter stressing that the world empire is now in sight.\nFriedrich Ratzel, writing at the same time, observed that the \"drive toward the building of continually larger states continues throughout the entirety of history\" and is active in the present. He drew \"Seven Laws of Expansionism\". His seventh law stated: \"The general trend toward amalgamation transmits the tendency of territorial growth from state to state and increases the tendency in the process of transmission.\" He commented on this law to make its meaning clear: \"There is on this small planet sufficient space for only one great state.\"\nTwo other contemporaries\u2014Kang Yu-wei and George Vacher de Lapouge\u2014stressed that imperial expansion cannot indefinitely proceed on the definite surface of the globe and therefore world empire is imminent. Kang Yu-wei in 1885 believed that the imperial trend will culminate in the contest between Washington and Berlin and Vacher de Lapouge in 1899 estimated that the final contest will be between Russia and America in which America is likely to triumph.\nThe above envisaged contests indeed took place, known to us as World War I and II. Writing during the Second, political scientists Derwent Whittlesey, Robert Strausz-Hup\u00e9 and John H. Herz concluded: \u201cNow that the earth is at last parceled out, consolidation has commenced.\u201d In \"this world of fighting superstates there could be no end to war until one state had subjected all others, until world empire had been achieved by the strongest. This undoubtedly is the logical final stage in the geopolitical theory of evolution.\" \nWriting in the last year of the War, German Historian Ludwig Dehio drew a similar conclusion:\nThe year after the War and in the first year of the nuclear age, Albert Einstein and British Philosopher Bertrand Russell, known as prominent pacifists, outlined for the near future a perspective of world empire (world government established by force). Einstein believed that, unless world government is established by agreement, an imperial world government would come by war or wars. Russell expected a third World War to result in a world government under the empire of the United States. Three years later, another prominent pacifist, Theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, generalized on the ancient Empires of Egypt, Babylon, Persia and Greece to imply for the modern world: \"The analogy in present global terms would be the final unification of the world through the preponderant power of either America or Russia, whichever proved herself victorious in the final struggle.\"\nRussian colleague of Russell and Neighbour, Georgy Fedotov, wrote in 1945: All empires are but stages on the way to the sole Empire which must swallow all others. The only question is who will build it and on which foundations. Universal unity is the only alternative to annihilation. Unity by conference is utopian but unity by conquest by the strongest Power is not and probably the uncompleted in this War will be completed in the next. \"Pax Atlantica\" is the best of possible outcomes.\nOriginally drafted as a secret study for the Office of Strategic Services (the precursor of the CIA) in 1944 and published as a book three years later, \"The Struggle for the World...\" by James Burnham concludes: If either of the two Superpowers wins, the result would be a universal empire which in our case would also be a world empire. The historical stage for a world empire had already been set prior to and independently of the discovery of atomic weapons but these weapons make a world empire inevitable and imminent. \"The atomic weapons ... will not permit the world to wait.\" Only a world empire can establish monopoly on atomic weapons and thus guarantee the survival of civilization. A world empire \"is in fact the objective of the Third World War which, in its preliminary stages, has already began\". The issue of a world empire \"will be decided, and in our day. In the course of the decision, both of the present antagonists may, it is true, be destroyed, but one of them must be.\" In 1951, Hans Morgenthau concluded that the \"best\" outcome of World War III would be world empire:\nExpert on earlier civilizations, Toynbee, further developed the subject of World War III leading to world empire:\nThe year this volume of A Study of History was published, US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announced \"a knock-out blow\" as an official doctrine, a detailed Plan was elaborated and \"Fortune\" magazine mapped the design. Section VIII, \"Atomic Armaments\", of the famous National Security Council Report 68 (NSC 68), approved by President Harry Truman in 1951, uses the term \"blow\" 17 times, mostly preceded by such adjectives as \"powerful\", \"overwhelming\", or \"crippling\". Another term applied by the strategists was \"Sunday punch\".\nA pupil of Toynbee, William McNeill, associated on the case of ancient China, which \"put a quietus upon the disorders of the warring states by erecting an imperial bureaucratic structure ... The warring states of the Twentieth century seem headed for a similar resolution of their conflicts.\" The ancient \"resolution\" McNeill evoked was one of the most sweeping universal conquests in world history, performed by Qin in 230\u2013221 BC. Chinese classic Sima Qian (d. 86 BC) described the event (6:234): \"Qin raised troops on grand scale\" and \"the whole world celebrated a great bacchanal\". Herman Kahn of the RAND Corporation criticized to an assembled group of SAC officers their war plan (SIOP-62). He did not use the term bacchanal but he coined on the occasion an associating word: \"Gentlemen, you do not have a war plan. You have a \"wargasm\"!\" History did not completely repeat itself but it passed close.\nCircumscription theory.\nAccording to the circumscription theory of Robert Carneiro, \"the more sharply circumscribed area, the more rapidly it will become politically unified.\" The Empires of Egypt, China and Japan are named the most durable political structures in human history. Correspondingly, these are the three most circumscribed civilizations in human history. The Empires of Egypt (established by Narmer c. 3000 BC) and China (established by Cheng in 221 BC) endured for over two millennia. German Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck, criticizing the Western idea of progress, emphasized that China and Egypt remained at one particular stage of development for millennia. This stage was universal empire. The development of Egypt and China came to a halt once their empires \"reached the limits of their natural habitat\". Sinology does not recognize the Eurocentric view of the \"inevitable\" imperial fall; Egyptology and Japanology pose equal challenges.\nCarneiro explored the Bronze Age civilizations. Stuart J. Kaufman, Richard Little and William Wohlforth researched the next three millennia, comparing eight civilizations. They conclude: The \"rigidity of the borders\" contributed importantly to hegemony in every concerned case. Hence, \"when the system's borders are rigid, the probability of hegemony is high\".\nThe circumscription theory was stressed in the comparative studies of the Roman and Chinese Empires. The circumscribed Chinese Empire recovered from all falls, while the fall of Rome, by contrast, was fatal. \"What counteracted this [imperial] tendency in Europe ... was a countervailing tendency for the geographical boundaries of the system to expand.\" If \"Europe had been a closed system, some great power would eventually have succeeded in establishing absolute supremacy over the other states in the region\".\nHis 1945 book on the four centuries of the European power struggle, Ludwig Dehio titled \"The Precarious Balance\". He explained the durability of the European states system by its overseas expansion: \"Overseas expansion and the system of states were born at the same time; the vitality that burst the bounds of the Western world also destroyed its unity.\" Edward Carr causally linked the end of the overseas outlet for imperial expansion and World Wars. In the nineteenth century, he wrote during the Second World War, imperialist wars were waged against \"primitive\" peoples. \"It was silly for European countries to fight against one another when they could still ... maintain social cohesion by continuous expansion in Asia and Africa. Since 1900, however, this has no longer been possible: \"the situation has radically changed\". Now wars are between \"imperial powers.\" Hans Morgenthau wrote that the very imperial expansion into relatively empty geographical spaces in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth centuries, in Africa, Eurasia, and western North America, deflected great power politics into the periphery of the earth, thereby reducing conflict. For example, the more attention Russia, France and the United States paid to expanding into far-flung territories in imperial fashion, the less attention they paid to one another, and the more peaceful, in a sense, the world was. But by the late nineteenth century, the consolidation of the great nation-states and empires of the West was consummated, and territorial gains could only be made at the expense of one another. John H. Herz outlined one \"chief function\" of the overseas expansion and the impact of its end: \nSome later commentators drew similar conclusions:\nThe opportunity for any system to expand in size seems almost a necessary condition for it to remain balanced, at least over the long haul. Far from being impossible or exceedingly improbable, systemic hegemony is likely under two conditions: \"when the boundaries of the international system remain stable and no new major powers emerge from outside the system.\" With the system becoming global, further expansion is precluded. The geopolitical condition of \"global closure\" will remain to the end of history. Since \"the contemporary international system is global, we can rule out the possibility that geographic expansion of the system will contribute to the emergence of a new balance of power, as it did so many times in the past.\" As Quincy Wright had put it, \"this process can no longer continue without interplanetary wars.\"\nOne of leading experts on world-system theory, Christopher Chase-Dunn, noted that the circumscription theory is applicable for the global system, since the global system is circumscribed. In fact, within less than a century of its circumscribed existence the global system overcame the centuries-old balance of power and reached the unipolarity. Given \"constant spatial parameters\" of the global system, its unipolar structure is neither historically unusual nor theoretically surprising.\nRandall Schweller theorized that a \"closed international system\", such as the global became a century ago, would reach \"entropy\" in a kind of thermodynamic law. Once the state of entropy is reached, there is no going back. The initial conditions are lost forever. Stressing the curiosity of the fact, Schweller writes that since the moment the modern world became a closed system, the process has worked in only one direction: from many poles to two poles to one pole. Thus unipolarity might represent the entropy\u2014stable and permanent loss of variation\u2014in the global system.\nPresent.\nChalmers Johnson argues that the US globe-girding network of hundreds of military bases already represents a global empire in its initial form:\nSimon Dalby associates the network of bases with the Roman imperial system:\nKenneth Pomeranz and Harvard Historian Niall Ferguson share the above-cited views: \"With American military bases in over 120 countries, we have hardly seen the end of empire.\u201d This \u201cvast archipelago of US military bases \u2026 far exceeds 19th-century British ambitions. Britain\u2019s imperium consisted of specific, albeit numerous, colonies and clients; the American imperial vision is much more global\u2026\u201d\nAnother Harvard Historian Charles S. Maier opens his \"Among Empires: American Ascendancy and Its Predecessors\" with these words: \"What a substratum for empire! Compared with which, the foundation of the Macedonian, the Roman and the British, sink into insignificance.\"\nOne of the most accepted distinctions between earlier empires and the American Empire is the latter's \u201cglobal\u201d or \u201cplanetary\u201d scope. French former Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine wondered: \"The situation is unprecedented: What previous empire subjugated the entire world...?\" The quests for universal empire are old but the present quest outdoes the previous in \"the notable respect of being the first to actually be global in its reach.\" For Historian Eric Hobsbawm, a \"key novelty of the US imperial project is that all other great powers and empires knew that they were not the only ones...\" Another Historian Paul Kennedy, who made his name in the 1980s with his prediction of the imminent US \u201cimperial overstretch,\u201d in 2002 acknowledged about the present world system: \nWalter Russell Mead observes that the United States attempts to repeate \u201cglobally\u201d what the ancient empires of Egypt, China and Rome had each accomplished on a regional basis. Professor Emeritus of Sociology at the University of Leeds, Zygmunt Bauman, concludes that due to its planetary dimension, the new empire cannot be drawn on a map:\n\"Times Atlas of Empires\" numbers 70 empires in the world history. Niall Ferguson lists numerous parallels between them and the United States. He concludes: \u201cTo those who would still insist on American exceptionalism, the historian of empires can only retort: as exceptional as all the other 69 empires.\u201d Fareed Zakaria stressed one element not exceptional for the American Empire\u2014the concept of exceptionalism. All dominant empires thought they were special.\nFuture.\nIn 1945, Historian Ludwig Dehio predicted global unification due to the circumscription of the global system, although he did not use this term. Being global, the system can neither expand nor be subject to external intrusion as the European states system had been for centuries:\nFifteen years later, Dehio confirmed his hypothesis: The European system owed its durability to its overseas outlet. \u201cBut how can a multiple grouping of world states conceivably be supported from outside in the framework of a finite globe?\u201d\nDuring the same time, Quincy Wright developed a similar concept. Balance-of-power politics has aimed less at preserving peace than at preserving the independence of states and preventing the development of world empire. In the course of history, the balance of power repeatedly reemerged, but on ever-wider scale. Eventually, the scale became global. Unless we proceed to \u201cinterplanetary wars,\u201d this pattern can no longer continue. In spite of significant reversals, the \u201ctrend towards world unity\u201d can \u201cscarcely be denied.\u201d World unity appears to be \u201cthe limit toward which the process of world history seems to tend.\u201d\nFive scholars\u2014Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll, Louis Morano, Rein Taagepera and the author of the circumscription theory Robert Carneiro\u2014researched expanding imperial cycles. They worked with historical atlases but the advent of YouTube provided us with a better visualization. They reached the same conclusion\u2014that a world empire is pre-determined\u2014and attempted to estimate the time of its appearance. Naroll and Carneiro found that this time is close at hand: around the year 2200 and 2300 respectively.\nThe founder of the Paneuropean Union, Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, writing yet in 1943, drew a more specific and immediate future imperial project: After the War America is bound \u201cto take over the command of the skies.\u201d The danger of \u201cthe utter annihilation of all enemy towns and lands\u201d can \u201conly be prevented by the air superiority of a single power \u2026 America\u2019s air role is the only alternative to intercontinental wars.\u201d Despite his outstanding anti-imperialism, Coudenhove-Kalergi detailed: \nCoudenhove-Kalergi envisaged a kind of Pax Americana modeled on \u201cPax Romana\u201d:\nThis period would be necessary transitory stage before World State is eventually established, though he did not specify how the last transformation is expected to occur. Coudenhove-Kalergi's follower in the teleological theory of World State, Toynbee, supposed the traditional way of universal conquest and emphasized that the world is ripe for conquest: \"\u2026Hitler's eventual failure to impose peace on the world by the force of arms was due, not to any flaw in his thesis that the world was ripe for conquest, but to an accidental combination of incidental errors in his measures\u2026\" But \"in falling by so narrow a margin to win the prize of world-dominion for himself, Hitler had left the prize dangling within the reach of any successor capable of pursuing the same aims of world-conquest with a little more patience, prudence, and tact.\" With his \"revolution of destruction,\" Hitler has performed the \"yeoman service\" for \"some future architect of a \"Pax Ecumenica\"... For a post-Hitlerian empire-builder, Hitler's derelict legacy was a gift of the Gods.\"\nThe next \u201carchitect of a Pax Ecumenica,\u201d known more commonly as Pax Americana, demonstrated \u201cmore patience, prudence, and tact.\u201d Consequently, as President Dwight Eisenhower put it, the NATO allies became \u201calmost psychopathic\u201d whenever anyone talked about a US withdrawal, and the reception of his successor John F. Kennedy in Berlin was \u201calmost hysterical,\u201d as Chancellor Conrad Adenauer characterized it . John Ikenberry finds that the Europeans wanted a stronger, more formal and more imperial system than the United States was initially willing to provide. In the end the United States settled for this \u201cform of empire\u2014a Pax Americana with formal commitments to Europe.\u201d According to a much debated thesis, the United States became \u201cempire by invitation.\u201d The period discussed in the thesis (1945\u20131952) ended precisely the year Toynbee theorized on \"some future architect of a Pax Ecumenica.\u201d\nDissociating America from Rome, Eisenhower gave a pessimistic forecast. In 1951, before he became President, he had written on West Europe: \u201cWe cannot be a modern Rome guarding the far frontiers with our legions if for no other reason than that these are not, politically, our frontiers. What we must do is to assist these [West European] peoples.\u201d Two years later, he wrote: When it was decided to deploy US divisions to Europe, no one had \u201cfor an instant\u201d thought that they would remain there for \u201cseveral decades\u201d\u2014that the United States could \u201cbuild a sort of Roman Wall with its own troops and so protect the world.\u201d\nEisenhower assured Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev on Berlin in 1959: \u201cClearly we did not contemplate 50 years in occupation there.\u201d It lasted, remarks Marc Trachtenberg, from July 1945 to September 1994, 10 months short of 50 years. Notably, when the US troops eventually left, they left eastward. Confirming the theory of the \u201cempire by invitation,\u201d with their first opportunity East European states extended the \u201cinvitation.\u201d\nChalmers Johnson regards the global military reach of the United States as empire in its \u201cinitial\u201d form. Dimitri Simes finds that most of the world sees the United States as a \"nascent\" imperial power. Some scholars concerned how this empire would look in its ultimate form. The ultimate form of empire was described by Michael Doyle in his \"Empires\". It is empire in which its two main components\u2014the ruling core and the ruled periphery\u2014merged to form one integrated whole. At this stage the \"empire\" as defined ceases to exist and becomes \"world state\". Doyle examplifies the transformation on the case of the Roman Emperor Caracalla whose legislation in AD 212 extended the Roman citizenship to all inhabitants of the Mediterranean world.\nInternational Relations scholar Alexander Wendt in his 2003 article \u201cWhy the World State is Inevitable\u2026\u201d supposed the pathway of universal conquest and subsequent consolidation provided the conquering power recognizes all conquered members. Replying on criticism, Wendt invoked the example of the Roman Empire: A \"world empire would be an unstable equilibrium, still subject to the struggle for recognition.\" However, conquest can \"produce a proper \u2018state\u2019 if, as a result of internal reform, the world empire eventually recognizes all of its members (like the Roman Empire did, for example).\u201d\nDoyle's case of the Roman Empire had also been evoked by Susan Strange in her 1988 article, \"The Future of the American Empire.\" Strange emphasized that the most persistent empires were those which best managed to integrate the ruling core and the peripheral allies. The article is partly a reply on the published a year earlier bestseller The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers which predicted imminent US \"imperial overstretch.\" Strange found this outcome unlikely, stressing the fact that the peripheral allies have been successfully recruited into the American Empire.\nEnvisaging a world empire of either the United States or the Soviet Union (whoever is victorious in World War III), Bertrand Russell projected the Roman scenario too: \"Like the Romans, they will, in the course of time, extend citizenship to the vanquished. There will then be a true world state, and it will be possible to forget that it will have owed its origin to conquest.\"\nTo the case of Caracalla, Toynbee added the Abbasid cosmopolitan reformation of 750 AD. Both \"were good auguries for the prospect that, in a post-Modern chapter of Western history, a supranational commonwealth originally based on the hegemony of a paramount power over its satellites might eventually be put on the sounder basis of a constitutional partnership in which all the people of all the partner states would have their fare share in the conduct of common affairs.\u201d\nHistorian Max Ostrovsky finds above mentioned cosmopolitan reformations to be the characteristic fate of persistent empires. When such a reformation occurs in our world, he writes, the green card would be abolished since all earth inhabitants would have it by birth. This cosmopolitan World State, as the records of earlier circumscribed civilizations suggest, could last millennia.\nSee also.\nLists:"}
{"id": "10160", "revid": "20818275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10160", "title": "Final Solution", "text": "The Final Solution (, ) or the Final Solution to the Jewish Question (, ) was a Nazi plan for the genocide of Jews during World War II. The \"Final Solution to the Jewish question\" was the official code name for the murder of all Jews within reach, which was not restricted to the European continent. This policy of deliberate and systematic genocide starting across German-occupied Europe was formulated in procedural and geopolitical terms by Nazi leadership in January 1942 at the Wannsee Conference held near Berlin, and culminated in the Holocaust, which saw the killing of 90% of Polish Jews, and two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe.\nThe nature and timing of the decisions that led to the Final Solution is an intensely researched and debated aspect of the Holocaust. The program evolved during the first 25 months of war leading to the attempt at \"murdering every last Jew in the German grasp\". Christopher Browning, a historian specializing on the Holocaust, wrote that most historians agree that the Final Solution cannot be attributed to a single decision made at one particular point in time. \"It is generally accepted the decision-making process was prolonged and incremental.\" In 1940, following the Fall of France, Adolf Eichmann devised the Madagascar Plan to move Europe's Jewish population to the French colony, but the plan was abandoned for logistical reasons, mainly a naval blockade. There were also preliminary plans to deport Jews to Palestine and Siberia. In 1941, wrote Raul Hilberg, in the first phase of the mass murder of Jews, the mobile killing units began to pursue their victims across occupied eastern territories; in the second phase, stretching across all of German-occupied Europe, the Jewish victims were sent on death trains to centralized extermination camps built for the purpose of systematic implementation of the Final Solution.\nBackground.\nThe term \"Final Solution\" was a euphemism used by the Nazis to refer to their plan for the annihilation of the Jewish people. Some historians argue that the usual tendency of the German leadership was to be extremely guarded when discussing the Final Solution. For example, Mark Roseman wrote that euphemisms were \"their normal mode of communicating about murder\". However, Jeffrey Herf has argued that the role of euphemisms in Nazi propaganda has been exaggerated, and in fact Nazi leaders often made direct threats against Jews. For example, during his speech of 30 January 1939, Hitler threatened \"the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe\".\nFrom gaining power in January 1933 until the outbreak of war in September 1939, the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany was focused on intimidation, expropriating their money and property, and encouraging them to emigrate. According to the Nazi Party policy statement, the Jews and Gypsies (although numerically fewer), were the only \"alien people in Europe\". In 1936, the Bureau of Romani Affairs in Munich was taken over by Interpol and renamed \"The Center for Combating the Gypsy Menace\". Introduced at the end of 1937, the \"final solution of the Gypsy Question\" entailed round-ups, expulsions, and incarceration of Romani in concentration camps built at, until this point in time, Dachau, Buchenwald, Flossenb\u00fcrg, Mauthausen, Natzweiler, Ravensbruck, Taucha, and Westerbork. After the Anschluss with Austria in 1938, Central Offices for Jewish Emigration were established in Vienna and Berlin to increase Jewish emigration, without covert plans for their forthcoming annihilation.\nThe outbreak of war and the invasion of Poland brought a population of 3.5 million Polish Jews under the control of the Nazi and Soviet security forces, and marked the start of a far more savage persecution, including mass killings. In the German-occupied zone of Poland, Jews were forced into hundreds of makeshift ghettos, pending other arrangements. Two years later, with the launch of Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the German top echelon began to pursue Hitler's new anti-Semitic plan to eradicate, rather than expel, Jews. Hitler's earlier ideas about forcible removal of Jews from the German-controlled territories in order to achieve \"Lebensraum\" were abandoned after the failure of the air campaign against Britain, initiating a naval blockade of Germany.&lt;ref name=\"CRB/Path\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler became the chief architect of a new plan, which came to be called \"The Final Solution to the Jewish question\". On 31 July 1941, \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann G\u00f6ring wrote to Reinhard Heydrich (Himmler's deputy and chief of the RSHA), authorising him to make the \"necessary preparations\" for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" and coordinate with all affected organizations. G\u00f6ring also instructed Heydrich to submit concrete proposals for the implementation of the new projected goal.\nBroadly speaking, the extermination of Jews was carried out in two major operations. With the onset of Operation Barbarossa, mobile killing units of the SS, the Einsatzgruppen, and Order Police battalions were dispatched to the occupied Soviet Union for the express purpose of killing all Jews. During the early stages of the invasion, Himmler himself visited Bia\u0142ystok in the beginning of July 1941, and requested that, \"as a matter of principle, any Jew\" behind the German-Soviet frontier was to be \"regarded as a partisan\". His new orders gave the SS and police leaders full authority for the mass murder behind the front lines. By August 1941, all Jewish men, women, and children were shot. In the second phase of annihilation, the Jewish inhabitants of central, western, and south-eastern Europe were transported by Holocaust trains to camps with newly built gassing facilities. Raul Hilberg wrote: \"In essence, the killers of the occupied USSR moved to the victims, whereas outside this arena, the victims were brought to the killers. The two operations constitute an evolution not only chronologically, but also in complexity.\" Massacres of about one million Jews occurred before plans for the Final Solution were fully implemented in 1942, but it was only with the decision to annihilate the entire Jewish population that extermination camps such as Auschwitz II Birkenau and Treblinka were fitted with permanent gas chambers to kill large numbers of Jews in a relatively short period of time.\nThe plans to exterminate all the Jews of Europe were formalized at the Wannsee Conference, held at an SS guesthouse near Berlin, on 20 January 1942. The conference was chaired by Heydrich and attended by 15 senior officials of the Nazi Party and the German government. Most of those attending were representatives of the Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, and the Justice Ministry, including Ministers for the Eastern Territories. At the conference, Heydrich indicated that approximately 11,000,000 Jews in Europe would fall under the provisions of the \"Final Solution\". This figure included not only Jews residing in Axis-controlled Europe, but also the Jewish populations of the United Kingdom and of neutral nations (Switzerland, Ireland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal, and European Turkey). Eichmann's biographer David Cesarani wrote that Heydrich's main purpose in convening the conference was to assert his authority over the various agencies dealing with Jewish issues. \"The simplest, most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations\" to death camps, according to Cesarani, \"was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east\" under the single authority of the RSHA. A copy of the minutes of this meeting was found by the Allies in March 1947; it was too late to serve as evidence during the first Nuremberg Trial, but was used by prosecutor General Telford Taylor in the subsequent Nuremberg Trials.\nAfter the end of World War II, surviving archival documents provided a clear record of the Final Solution policies and actions of Nazi Germany. They included the Wannsee Conference Protocol, which documented the co-operation of various German state agencies in the SS-led Holocaust, as well as some 3,000 tons of original German records captured by Allied armies, including the Einsatzgruppen reports, which documented the progress of the mobile killing units assigned, among other tasks, to kill Jewish civilians during the attack on the Soviet Union in 1941. The evidential proof which documented the mechanism of the Holocaust was submitted at Nuremberg.\nPhase one: death squads of Operation Barbarossa.\nThe Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union codenamed Operation Barbarossa, which commenced on 22 June 1941, set in motion a \"war of annihilation\" which quickly opened the door to the systematic mass murder of European Jews. For Hitler, Bolshevism was merely \"the most recent and most nefarious manifestation of the eternal Jewish threat\". On 3 March 1941, Wehrmacht Joint Operations Staff Chief Alfred Jodl repeated Hitler's declaration that the \"Jewish-Bolshevik intelligentsia would have to be eliminated\" and that the forthcoming war would be a confrontation between two completely opposing cultures. In May 1941, Gestapo leader Heinrich M\u00fcller wrote a preamble to the new law limiting the jurisdiction of military courts in prosecuting troops for criminal actions because: \"This time, the troops will encounter an especially dangerous element from the civilian population, and therefore, have the right and obligation to secure themselves.\"\nHimmler and Heydrich assembled a force of about 3,000 men from Security Police, Gestapo, Kripo, SD, and the Waffen-SS, as the so-called \"special commandos of the security forces\" known as the \"Einsatzgruppen\", to eliminate both communists and Jews in occupied territories. These forces were supported by 21 battalions of Orpo Reserve Police under Kurt Daluege, adding up to 11,000 men. The explicit orders given to the Order Police varied between locations, but for Police Battalion 309 participating in the first mass murder of 5,500 Polish Jews in the Soviet-controlled Bia\u0142ystok (a Polish provincial capital), Major Weiss explained to his officers that Barbarossa is a war of annihilation against Bolshevism, and that his battalions would proceed ruthlessly against all Jews, regardless of age or sex.\nAfter crossing the Soviet demarcation line in 1941, what had been regarded as exceptional in the Greater Germanic Reich became a normal way of operating in the east. The crucial taboo against the killing of women and children was breached not only in Bia\u0142ystok, but also in Garg\u017edai in late June. By July, significant numbers of women and children were being killed behind all front-lines not only by the Germans, but also by the local Ukrainian and Lithuanian auxiliary forces. On 29 July 1941, at a meeting of SS officers in Vileyka (Polish Wilejka, now Belarus), the \"Einsatzgruppen\" had been given a dressing-down for their low execution figures. Heydrich himself issued an order to include the Jewish women and children in all subsequent shooting operations. Accordingly, by the end of July the entire Jewish population of Vileyka, men, women and children, were murdered. Around 12 August, no less than two-thirds of the Jews shot in Surazh were women and children of all ages. In late August 1941 the \"Einsatzgruppen\" murdered 23,600 Jews in the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre. A month later, the largest mass shooting of Soviet Jews took place on 29\u201330 September in the ravine of Babi Yar, near Kyiv, where more than 33,000 Jewish people of all ages were systematically machine-gunned. In mid-October 1941, HSSPF South, under the command of Friedrich Jeckeln, had reported the indiscriminate killing of more than 100,000 people.\nBy the end of December 1941, before the Wannsee Conference, over 439,800 Jewish people had been murdered, and the Final Solution policy in the east became common knowledge within the SS. Entire regions were reported \"free of Jews\" by the \"Einsatzgruppen\". Addressing his district governors in the General Government on 16 December 1941, Governor-General Hans Frank said: \"But what will happen to the Jews? Do you believe they will be lodged in settlements in Ostland? In Berlin, we were told: why all this trouble; we cannot use them in the Ostland or the Reichskommissariat either; liquidate them yourselves!\" Two days later, Himmler recorded the outcome of his discussion with Hitler. The result was: \"als Partisanen auszurotten\" (\"exterminate them as partisans\"). Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust. Within two years, the total number of shooting victims in the east had risen to between 618,000 and 800,000 Jews.\n\"Bezirk Bialystok\" and \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\".\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the Final Solution began in the newly formed district of \"Bezirk Bialystok\". The German army took over Bia\u0142ystok within days. On Friday, 27 June 1941, the Reserve Police Battalion 309 arrived in the city and set the Great Synagogue on fire with hundreds of Jewish men locked inside. The burning of the synagogue was followed by a frenzy of killings both inside the homes around the Jewish neighbourhood of Chanajki, and in the city park, lasting until night time. The next day, some 30 wagons of dead bodies were taken to mass graves. As noted by Browning, the killings were led by a commander \"who correctly intuited and anticipated the wishes of his F\u00fchrer\" without direct orders. For reasons unknown, the number of victims in the official report by Major Weis was cut in half. The next mass shooting of Polish Jews within the newly formed \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\" took place in two days of 5\u20137 August in occupied Pi\u0144sk, where over 12,000 Jews died at the hands of Waffen SS, not the \"Einsatzgruppen\". An additional 17,000 Jews perished there in a ghetto uprising crushed a year later with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police.\nAn Israeli historian Dina Porat claimed that the Final Solution, i.e.: \"the systematic overall physical extermination of Jewish communities one after the other \u2013 began in Lithuania\" during the massive German chase after the Red Army across the Baltic states in \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\". The subject of the Holocaust in Lithuania has been analysed by Konrad Kweit from USHMM who wrote: \"Lithuanian Jews were among the first victims of the Holocaust [beyond the eastern borders of occupied Poland]. The Germans carried out the mass executions [...] signaling the beginning of the 'Final Solution'.\" About 80,000 Jews were killed in Lithuania by October (including in formerly Polish Wilno) and about 175,000 by the end of 1941 according to official reports.\n\"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\".\nWithin one week from the start of Operation Barbarossa, Heydrich issued an order to his \"Einsatzgruppen\" for the on-the-spot execution of all Bolsheviks, interpreted by the SS to mean all Jews. One of the first indiscriminate massacres of men, women, and children in Reichskommissariat Ukraine took the lives of over 4,000 Polish Jews in occupied \u0141uck on 2\u20134 July 1941, murdered by \"Einsatzkommando\" 4a assisted by the Ukrainian People's Militia. Formed officially on 20 August 1941, the \"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\" \u2013 stretching from prewar east-central Poland to Crimea \u2013 had become operational theatre of the \"Einsatzgruppe\" C. Within the Soviet Union proper, between 9 July 1941 and 19 September 1941 the city of Zhytomyr was made \"Judenfrei\" in three murder operations conducted by German and Ukrainian police in which 10,000 Jews perished. In the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre of 26\u201328 August 1941 some 23,600 Jews were shot in front of open pits (including 14,000\u201318,000 people expelled from Hungary). After an incident in Bila Tserkva in which 90 small children left behind had to be shot separately, Blobel requested that Jewish mothers hold them in their arms during mass shootings. Long before the conference at Wannsee, 28,000 Jews were shot by SS and Ukrainian military in Vinnytsia on 22 September 1941, followed by the 29 September massacre of 33,771 Jews at Babi Yar. In Dnipropetrovsk, on 13 October 1941 some 10,000\u201315,000 Jews were shot. In Chernihiv, 10,000 Jews were put to death and only 260 Jews were spared. In mid-October, during the Krivoy-Rog massacre of 4,000\u20135,000 Soviet Jews the entire Ukrainian auxiliary police force actively participated. In the first days of January 1942 in Kharkiv, 12,000 Jews were murdered, but smaller massacres continued in this period on daily basis in countless other locations. In August 1942 in the presence of only a few German SS men over 5,000 Jews were massacred in Polish Zofj\u00f3wka by the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police leading to the town's complete sweep from existence.\n\"Distrikt Galizien\".\nHistorians find it difficult to determine precisely when the first concerted effort at annihilation of all Jews began in the last weeks of June 1941 during Operation Barbarossa. Dr. Samuel Drix (\"Witness to Annihilation\"), Jochaim Schoenfeld (\"Holocaust Memoirs\"), and several survivors of the Janowska concentration camp, who were interviewed in the film \"Janovska Camp at Lvov\", among other witnesses, have argued that the Final Solution began in Lw\u00f3w (Lemberg) in \"Distrikt Galizien\" of the General Government during the German advance across Soviet-occupied Poland. Statements and memoirs of survivors emphasize that, when Ukrainian nationalists and \"ad hoc\" Ukrainian People's Militia (soon reorganized as the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police) began to murder women and children, rather than only male Jews, the \"Final Solution\" had begun. Witnesses have said that such murders happened both prior to and during the pogroms reportedly triggered by the NKVD prisoner massacre. The question of whether there was some coordination between the Lithuanian and Ukrainian militias remains open (i.e. collaborating for a joint assault in Kovno, Wilno, and Lw\u00f3w).\nThe killings continued uninterrupted. On 12 October 1941, in Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, some 10,000\u201312,000 Jewish men, women, and children were shot at the Jewish cemetery by the German uniformed SS-men and Ukrainian Auxiliary Police during the so-called \"Bloody Sunday\" \"\". The shooters began firing at 12 noon and continued without stopping by taking turns. There were picnic tables set up on the side with bottles of vodka and sandwiches for those who needed to rest from the deafening noise of gunfire. It was the single largest massacre of Polish Jews in \"Generalgouvernement\" prior to mass gassings of \"Aktion Reinhard\", which commenced at Be\u0142\u017cec in March 1942. Notably, the extermination operations in Che\u0142mno had begun on 8 December 1941, one-and-a-half-month before Wannsee, but Che\u0142mno \u2013 located in \"Reichsgau Wartheland\" \u2013 was not a part of Reinhard, and neither was Auschwitz-Birkenau functioning as an extermination center until November 1944 in Polish lands annexed by Hitler and added to Germany proper.\nThe conference at Wannsee gave impetus to the so-called \"second sweep\" of the Holocaust by the bullet in the east. Between April and July 1942 in Volhynia, 30,000 Jews were murdered in death pits with the help of dozens of newly formed Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\". Owing to good relations with the Ukrainian \"Hilfsverwaltung\", these auxiliary battalions were deployed by the SS also in Russia Center, Russia South, and in Byelorussia; each with about 500 soldiers divided into three companies. They participated in the extermination of 150,000 Volhynian Jews alone, or 98 percent of the Jewish inhabitants of the entire region. In July 1942 the Completion of the Final Solution in the General Government territory which included \"Distrikt Galizien\", was ordered personally by Himmler. He set the initial deadline for 31 December 1942.\nPhase two: deportations to extermination camps.\nWhen the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the area of the General Government was enlarged by the inclusion of regions that had been annexed by the Soviet Union since the 1939 invasion. The killings of Jews from the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto in the \"Warthegau\" district began in early December 1941 with the use of gas vans (approved by Heydrich) at the Kulmhof extermination camp. Victims were misled under the deceptive guise of \"Resettlement in the East\", organised by SS Commissioners, was also tried and tested at Che\u0142mno. By the time the European-wide Final Solution was formulated two months later, Heydrich's RSHA had already confirmed the effectiveness of industrial killing by exhaust fumes, and the strength of deception.\nConstruction work on the first killing centre at Be\u0142\u017cec in occupied Poland began in October 1941, three months before the Wannsee Conference. The new facility was operational by March the following year.&lt;ref name=\"M/MPwB\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; By mid-1942, two more death camps had been built on Polish lands: Sobib\u00f3r operational by May 1942, and Treblinka operational in July. From July 1942, the mass murder of Polish and foreign Jews took place at Treblinka as part of Operation Reinhard, the deadliest phase of the Final Solution. More Jews were killed at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz. By the time the mass killings of Operation Reinhard ended in 1943, roughly two million Jews in German-occupied Poland had been murdered. The total number of people killed in 1942 in Lublin/Majdanek, Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka was 1,274,166 by Germany's own estimation, not counting Auschwitz II Birkenau nor \"Kulmhof\". Their bodies were buried in mass graves initially. Both Treblinka and Be\u0142\u017cec were equipped with powerful crawler excavators from Polish construction sites in the vicinity, capable of most digging tasks without disrupting surfaces. Although other methods of extermination, such as the cyanic poison Zyklon B, were already being used at other Nazi killing centres such as Auschwitz, the \"Aktion Reinhard\" camps used lethal exhaust gases from captured tank engines.\nThe \"Holocaust by bullets\" (as opposed to the \"Holocaust by gas\") went on in the territory of occupied Poland in conjunction with the ghetto uprisings, irrespective of death camps' quota. In two weeks of July 1942, the S\u0142onim Ghetto revolt, crushed with the help of Latvian, Lithuanian, and Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\", cost the lives of 8,000\u201313,000 Jews. The second largest mass shooting (to that particular date) took place in late October 1942 when the insurgency was suppressed in the Pi\u0144sk Ghetto; over 26,000 men, women and children were shot with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police before the ghetto's closure. During the suppression of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (the largest single revolt by Jews during World War\u00a0II), 13,000 Jews were killed in action before May 1943. Numerous other uprisings were quelled without impacting the pre-planned Nazi deportations actions.\nAbout two-thirds of the overall number of victims of the Final Solution were killed before February 1943, which included the main phase of the extermination programme in the West launched by Eichmann on 11 June 1942 from Berlin. The Holocaust trains run by the Deutsche Reichsbahn and several other national railway systems delivered condemned Jewish captives from as far as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Moravia, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, and even Scandinavia. The cremation of exhumed corpses to destroy any evidence left behind began in early spring and continued throughout summer. The nearly completed clandestine programme of murdering all deportees was explicitly addressed by Heinrich Himmler in his Posen speeches made to the leadership of the Nazi Party on 4 October and during a conference in Posen (Poznan) of 6 October 1943 in occupied Poland. Himmler explained why the Nazi leadership found it necessary to kill Jewish women and children along with the Jewish men. The assembled functionaries were told that the Nazi state policy was \"the extermination of the Jewish people\" as such.\nOn 19 October 1943, five days after the prisoner revolt in Sobib\u00f3r, Operation Reinhard was terminated by Odilo Globocnik on behalf of Himmler. The camps responsible for the killing of nearly 2,700,000 Jews were soon closed. Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka were dismantled and ploughed over before spring. The operation was followed by the single largest German massacre of Jews in the entire war carried out on 3 November 1943; with approximately 43,000 prisoners shot one-by-one simultaneously in three nearby locations by the Reserve Police Battalion 101 hand-in-hand with the Trawniki men from Ukraine. Auschwitz alone had enough capacity to fulfill the Nazis' remaining extermination needs.\nAuschwitz II Birkenau.\nUnlike Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka, and Lublin-Majdanek, which were built in the occupied General Government territory inhabited by the largest concentrations of Jews, the killing centre at Auschwitz subcamp of Birkenau operated in Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany directly. The new gas chambers at Bunker I were finished around March 1942 when the Final Solution was officially launched at Belzec. Until mid-June 20,000 Silesian Jews were killed there using Zyklon B. In July 1942, Bunker II became operational. In August, another 10,000\u201313,000 Polish Jews from Silesia perished, along with 16,000 French Jews declared 'stateless', and 7,700 Jews from Slovakia.\nThe infamous 'Gate of Death' at Auschwitz II for the incoming freight trains was built of brick and cement mortar in 1943, and the three-track rail spur was added. Until mid-August, 45,000 Thessaloniki Jews were murdered in a mere six months, including over 30,000 Jews from Sosnowiec (Sosnowitz) and Bendzin Ghettos. The spring of 1944 marked the beginning of the last phase of the Final Solution at Birkenau. The new big ramps and sidings were constructed, and two freight elevators were installed inside Crematoria II and III for moving the bodies faster. The size of the \"Sonderkommando\" was nearly quadrupled in preparation for the Special Operation Hungary (\"Sonderaktion Ungarn\"). In May 1944, Auschwitz-Birkenau became the site of one of the two largest mass murder operations in modern history, after the \"Gro\u00dfaktion Warschau\" deportations of the Warsaw Ghetto inmates to Treblinka in 1942. It is estimated that until July 1944 approximately 320,000 Hungarian Jews were gassed at Birkenau in less than eight weeks. The entire operation was photographed by the SS. In total, between April and November 1944, Auschwitz II received over 585,000 Jews from over a dozen regions as far as Greece, Italy, and France, including 426,000 Jews from Hungary, 67,000 from \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, 25,000 from Theresienstadt, and the last 23,000 Jews from the General Government. Auschwitz was liberated by the Red Army on 27 January 1945, when the gassing had already stopped.\nHistoriographic debate about the decision.\nHistorians disagree as to when and how the Nazi leadership decided that the European Jews should be exterminated. The controversy is commonly described as the functionalism versus intentionalism debate which began in the 1960s, and subsided thirty years later. In the 1990s, the attention of mainstream historians moved away from the question of top executive orders triggering the Holocaust, and focused on factors which were overlooked earlier, such as personal initiative and ingenuity of countless functionaries in charge of the killing fields. No written evidence of Hitler ordering the Final Solution has ever been found to serve as a \"smoking gun\", and therefore, this one particular question remains unanswered.\nHitler made numerous predictions regarding the Holocaust of the Jews of Europe prior to the beginning of World War II. During a speech given on 30 January 1939, on the sixth anniversary of his accession to power, Hitler said:\nRaul Hilberg, in his book \"The Destruction of the European Jews\", was the first historian to systematically document and analyse the Nazi project to kill every Jew in Europe. The book was initially published in 1961, and issued in an enlarged version in 1985.\nHilberg's analysis of the steps that led to the destruction of European Jews revealed that it was \"an administrative process carried out by bureaucrats in a network of offices spanning a continent\". Hilberg divides this bureaucracy into four components or hierarchies: the Nazi Party, the civil service, industry, and the Wehrmacht armed forces \u2013 but their cooperation is viewed as \"so complete that we may truly speak of their fusion into a machinery of destruction\". For Hilberg, the key stages in the destruction process were: definition and registration of the Jews; expropriation of property; concentration into ghettoes and camps; and, finally, annihilation. Hilberg gives an estimate of 5.1 million as the total number of Jews killed. He breaks this figure down into three categories: Ghettoization and general privation: over 800,000; open-air shootings: over 1,300,000; extermination camps: up to 3,000,000.\nWith respect to the \"functionalism versus intentionalism\" debate about a master plan for the Final Solution, or the lack thereof, Hilberg posits what has been described as \"a kind of structural determinism\". Hilberg argues that \"a destruction process has an inherent pattern\" and the \"sequence of steps in a destruction process is thus determined\". If a bureaucracy is motivated \"to inflict maximum damage upon a group of people\", it is \"inevitable that a bureaucracy\u2014no matter how decentralized its apparatus or how unplanned its activities\u2014should push its victims through these stages\", culminating in their annihilation.\nIn his monograph, \"The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939\u00a0\u2013 March 1942\", Christopher Browning argues that Nazi policy toward the Jews was radicalized twice: in September 1939, when the invasion of Poland implied policies of mass expulsion and massive loss of Jewish lives; and in spring 1941, when preparation for Operation Barbarossa involved the planning of mass execution, mass expulsion, and starvation \u2013 to dwarf what had happened in Jewish Poland.\nBrowning believes that the \"Final Solution as it is now understood\u2014the systematic attempt to murder every last Jew within the German grasp\" took shape during a five-week period, from 18 September to 25 October 1941. During this time, the sites of the first extermination camps were selected, different methods of killing were tested, Jewish emigration from the Third Reich was forbidden, and 11 transports departed for \u0141\u00f3d\u017a as a temporary holding station. Of this period, Browning writes, \"The vision of the Final Solution had crystallised in the minds of the Nazi leadership, and was being turned into reality.\" This was the peak of Nazi victories against the Soviet Army on the Eastern Front, and, according to Browning, the stunning series of German victories led to both an expectation that the war would soon be won, and the planning of the final destruction of the \"Jewish-Bolshevik enemy\".\nBrowning describes the creation of the extermination camps, which were responsible for the largest number of deaths in the Final Solution, as bringing together three separate developments within the Third Reich: the concentration camps which had been established in Germany since 1933; an expansion of the gassing technology of the Nazi euthanasia programme to provide killing mechanism of greater efficiency and psychological detachment; and the creation of \"factories of death\" to be fed endless streams of victims by mass uprooting and deportation that utilized the experience and personnel from earlier population resettlement programmes\u2014especially the HSSPF and Adolf Eichmann's RSHA for \"Jewish affairs and evacuations\".\nPeter Longerich argues that the search for a finite date on which the Nazis embarked upon the extermination of the Jews is futile, in his book \"Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews\" (2011). Longerich writes: \"We should abandon the notion that it is historically meaningful to try to filter the wealth of available historical material and pick out a single decision\" that led to the Holocaust.\nTimothy Snyder writes that Longerich \"grants the significance of Greiser's murder of Jews by gas at Che\u0142mno in December 1941\", but also detects a significant moment of escalation in spring 1942, which includes \"the construction of the large death factory at Treblinka for the destruction of the Warsaw Jews, and the addition of a gas chamber to the concentration camp at Auschwitz for the murder of the Jews of Silesia\". Longerich suggests that it \"was only in the summer of 1942, that mass killing was finally understood as the realization of the Final Solution, rather than as an extensively violent preliminary to some later program of slave labor and deportation to the lands of a conquered USSR\". For Longerich, to see mass killing as the Final Solution was an acknowledgement by the Nazi leadership that there would not be a German military victory over the USSR in the near future.\nDavid Cesarani emphasises the improvised, haphazard nature of Nazi policies in response to changing war time conditions in his overview, \"Final Solution: The Fate of the European Jews 1933\u201349\" (2016). \"Cesarani provides telling examples\", wrote Mark Roseman, \"of a lack of coherence and planning for the future in Jewish policy, even when we would most expect it. The classic instance is the invasion of Poland in 1939, when not even the most elementary consideration had been given to what should happen to Poland's Jews either in the shorter or longer term. Given that Poland was home to the largest Jewish population in the world, and that, in a couple of years, it would house the extermination camps, this is remarkable.\"\nWhereas Browning places the Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews in the context of the Wehrmacht victories on the Eastern front, Cesarani argues that the German subsequent realisation that there would be no swift victory over the Soviet Union \"scuppered the last territorial 'solution' still on the table: expulsion to Siberia\". Germany's declaration of war on the United States on 11 December 1941, \"meant that holding European Jews hostage to deter the US from entering the conflict was now pointless\". Cesarani concludes, the Holocaust \"was rooted in anti-Semitism, but it was shaped by war\". The fact that the Nazis were, ultimately, so successful in killing between five and six million Jews was not due to the efficiency of the Third Reich or the clarity of their policies. \"Rather, the catastrophic rate of killing was due to German persistence \u2026 and the duration of the murderous campaigns. This last factor was largely a consequence of allied military failure.\"\nThe entry of the U.S. into the War is also crucial to the time-frame proposed by Christian Gerlach, who argued in his 1997 thesis that the Final Solution decision was announced on 12 December 1941, when Hitler addressed a meeting of the Nazi Party (the \"Reichsleiter\") and of regional party leaders (the \"Gauleiter\"). The day after Hitler's speech, on 13 December 1941 Joseph Goebbels wrote in his diary:\nCesarani notes that by 1943, as the military position of the German forces deteriorated, the Nazi leadership became more openly explicit about the Final Solution. In March, Goebbels confided to his diary: \"On the Jewish question especially, we are in it so deeply that there is no getting out any longer. And that is a good thing. Experience teaches that a movement and a people who have burned their bridges fight with much greater determination and fewer constraints than those that have a chance of retreat.\"\nWhen Himmler addressed senior SS personnel and leading members of the regime in the Posen speeches on 4 October 1943, he used \"the fate of the Jews as a sort of blood bond to tie the civil and military leadership to the Nazi cause\"."}
{"id": "10163", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10163", "title": "Eusebius (disambiguation)", "text": "Eusebius (AD 263 \u2013 339; also called Eusebius of Caesarea and Eusebius Pamphili) was a Roman historian, exegete and Christian polemicist. \nEusebius (; Greek \u0395\u1f50\u03c3\u03ad\u03b2\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \"pious\" from \"eu\" (\u03b5\u1f56) \"well\" and \"sebein\" (\u03c3\u03ad\u03b2\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd) \"to respect\") may also refer to:\nEusebius is also the name of:"}
{"id": "10164", "revid": "18855734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10164", "title": "Eurystheus", "text": "In Greek mythology, Eurystheus (; , ) was king of Tiryns, one of three Mycenaean strongholds in the Argolid, although other authors including Homer and Euripides cast him as ruler of Argos.\nFamily.\nEurystheus was the son of Sthenelus and Nicippe, and he was a grandson of the hero Perseus. He was married to Antimache, daughter of Amphidamas.\nMythology.\nLabours of Heracles.\nIn the contest of wills between Hera and Zeus over whose candidate would be hero, fated to defeat the remaining creatures representing an old order and bring about the reign of the Twelve Olympians, Eurystheus was Hera's candidate and Heracles\u2014though his name implies that at one archaic stage of myth-making he had carried \"Hera's fame\"\u2014was the candidate of Zeus. The arena for the actions that would bring about this deep change are the Twelve Labors imposed on Heracles by Eurystheus. The immediate necessity for the Labours of Heracles is as penance for Heracles' murder of his own family, in a fit of madness, which had been sent by Hera; however, further human rather than mythic motivation is supplied by mythographers who note that their respective families had been rivals for the throne of Mycenae. Details of the individual episodes may be found in the article on the Labours of Heracles, but Hera was connected with all of the opponents Heracles had to overcome.\nHeracles' human stepfather Amphitryon was also a grandson of Perseus, and since Amphitryon's father (Alcaeus) was older than Eurystheus' father (Sthenelus), he might have received the kingdom, but Sthenelus had banished Amphitryon for accidentally killing (a familiar mytheme) the eldest son in the family (Electryon). When, shortly before his son Heracles was born, Zeus proclaimed the next-born descendant of Perseus should get the kingdom, Hera thwarted his ambitions by delaying Alcmene's labour and having her candidate Eurystheus born prematurely. Heracles' first task was to slay the Nemean Lion and bring back its skin, which Heracles decided to wear. Eurystheus was so scared by Heracles' fearsome guise that he hid in a subterranean bronze winejar, and from that moment forth all labors were communicated to Heracles through a herald, Copreus.\nFor his second labour, to slay the Lernaean Hydra, Heracles took with him his nephew, Iolaus, as a charioteer. When Eurystheus found out that Heracles' nephew had helped him he declared that the labour had not been completed alone and as a result did not count towards the ten labours set for him.\nEurystheus' third task did not involve killing a beast, but capturing one alive\u2014the Ceryneian Hind, a golden-horned hind or doe sacred to Artemis. Heracles knew that he had to return the hind, as he had promised, to Artemis, so he agreed to hand it over on the condition that Eurystheus himself come out and take it from him. Eurystheus did come out, but the moment Heracles let the hind go, she sprinted back to her mistress, and Heracles departed, saying that Eurystheus had not been quick enough.\nWhen Heracles returned with the Erymanthian Boar, Eurystheus was again frightened and hid in his jar, begging Heracles to get rid of the beast; Heracles obliged.\nThe fifth labour proposed by Eurystheus was to clear out the numerous stables of Augeias. Striking a deal with Augeias, Heracles proposed a payment of a tenth of Augeias' cattle if the labour was completed successfully. Not believing the task feasible, Augeias agreed, asking his son Phyleus to witness.\nHeracles rerouted two nearby rivers (Alpheis and Peneios) through the stable, clearing out the dung rapidly. When Augeias learned of Heracles' bargain for the task, he refused payment. Heracles brought the case to court, and Phyleus testified against his father. Enraged, Augeias banished both Phyleus and Heracles from the land before the court had cast their vote. However, Eurystheus refused to credit the labour to Heracles, as he had performed it for payment. So Heracles went and drove Augeias out of the kingdom and installed Phyleus as king. Heracles then took his tenth of the cattle and left them to graze in a field by his home.\nFor his sixth labour, Heracles had to drive the Stymphalian Birds off the marshes they plagued. He did so, shooting down several birds with his Hydra-poisoned arrows and bringing them back to Eurystheus as proof.\nFor his seventh labour, Heracles captured the Cretan Bull. He used a lasso and rode it back to his cousin. Eurystheus offered to sacrifice the bull to Hera his patron, who hated Heracles. She refused the sacrifice because it reflected glory on Heracles. The bull was released and wandered to Marathon, becoming known as the Marathonian Bull.\nWhen Heracles brought back the man-eating Mares of Diomedes successfully, Eurystheus dedicated the horses to Hera and allowed them to roam freely in the Argolid. Bucephalus, Alexander the Great's horse, was said to be descended from these mares.\nTo acquire the belt of Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons, was Heracles ninth task. This task was at the request of Eurystheus' daughter, Admete. For the tenth labour, he stole the cattle of the giant Geryon, which Eurystheus then sacrificed to Hera.\nTo extend what may have once been ten Labours to the canonical dozen, it was said that Eurystheus didn't count the Hydra, as he was assisted, nor the Augean stables, as Heracles received payment for his work. For the eleventh labour, Heracles had to obtain the Apples of the Hesperides; he convinced their father, the Titan Atlas, to help him, but did his share of work by temporarily holding up the sky in the Titan's stead. For his final labour, he was to capture Cerberus, the three-headed hound that guarded the entrance to Hades. When he managed to bring the struggling animal back, the terrified Eurystheus hid in his jar one more time, begging Heracles to leave for good and take the dog with him.\nDeath.\nAfter Heracles died, Eurystheus remained bitter over the indignity the hero had caused him. He attempted to destroy Heracles' many children (the Heracleidae, led by Hyllus), who fled to Athens. He attacked the city but was soundly defeated, and Eurystheus and his sons were killed. Though it is widely told that Hyllus killed Eurystheus, the stories about the killer of Eurystheus and the fate of his corpse vary, but the Athenians believed the burial site of Eurystheus remained on their soil and served to protect the country against the descendants of Heracles, who traditionally included the Spartans and Argives.\nAfter Eurystheus' death, the brothers Atreus and Thyestes, whom he had left in charge during his absence, took over the city, the former exiling the latter and assuming the kingship, while Tiryns returned to the kingship of Argos.\nEurystheus in Euripides.\nEurystheus was a character in \"Heracleidae\", a play by Euripides. Macaria, one of the daughters of Heracles, and her brothers and sisters hid from Eurystheus in Athens, which was ruled by King Demophon. As Eurystheus prepared to attack, an oracle told Demophon that he would win if and only if a noble woman was sacrificed to Persephone. Macaria volunteered for the sacrifice and a spring was named the Macarian spring in her honor. Eurystheus speaks prophetically of his burial within Attica, claiming that he will be an anti-hero of sorts, though one who will eventually protect the Athenians.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10165", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10165", "title": "Effects unit", "text": "An effects unit or effects pedal is an electronic device that alters the sound of a musical instrument or other audio source through audio signal processing. \nCommon effects include distortion/overdrive, often used with electric guitar in electric blues and rock music; dynamic effects such as volume pedals and compressors, which affect loudness; filters such as wah-wah pedals and graphic equalizers, which modify frequency ranges; modulation effects, such as chorus, flangers and phasers; pitch effects such as pitch shifters; and time effects, such as reverb and delay, which create echoing sounds and emulate the sound of different spaces.\nMost modern effects use solid-state electronics or digital signal processors. Some effects, particularly older ones such as Leslie speakers and spring reverbs, use mechanical components or vacuum tubes. Effects are often used as stompboxes, typically placed on the floor and controlled with footswitches. They may also be built into guitar amplifiers, instruments (such as the Hammond B-3 organ), tabletop units designed for DJs and record producers, and rackmounts, and are widely used as audio plug-ins in such common formats as VST, AAX, and AU.\nMusicians, audio engineers and record producers use effects units during live performances or in the studio, typically with electric guitar, bass guitar, electronic keyboard or electric piano. While effects are most frequently used with electric or electronic instruments, they can be used with any audio source, such as acoustic instruments, drums, and vocals.\nTerminology.\nAn effects unit is also called an \"effect box\", \"effects device\", \"effects processor\" or simply \"effects\". In audio engineer parlance, a signal without effects is \"dry\" and an effect-processed signal is \"wet\". The abbreviation \"F/X\" or \"FX\" is sometimes used. A pedal-style unit may be called a \"stomp box\", \"stompbox\", \"effects pedal\" or \"pedal\". A musician bringing many pedals to a live show or recording session often mounts the pedals on a guitar pedalboard, to reduce set-up and tear-down time and, for pedalboards with lids, protect the pedals during transportation. When a musician has multiple effects in a rack mounted road case, this case may be called an \"effects rack\" or \"rig\". When rackmounted effects are mounted in a roadcase, this also speeds up a musician's set-up and tear-down time, because all of the effects can be connected together inside the rack case and all of the units can be plugged into a powerbar.\nFormats.\nEffects units are available in a variety of formats or form factors. Stompboxes are used in both live performance and studio recording. Rackmount devices saw a heavy usage during the later 20th century, due to their advanced processing power and desirable tones. However, by the 21st century, with the advent of digital plugins and more powerful stompboxes for live usage, the need and practicality of rackmount effects units went down, and as such, prices of rack effects have diminished due to lower usage. An effects unit can consist of analog or digital circuitry or a combination of the two. During a live performance, the effect is plugged into the electrical \"signal\" path of the instrument. In the studio, an instrument or another sound source \u2014 possibly an auxiliary output of a mixer or a DAW \u2014 is patched into the effect. Whatever the form factor, effects units are part of a studio or musician's outboard gear.\nStompboxes.\nStompboxes are small plastic or metal chassis which usually lie on the floor or in a pedalboard to be operated by the user's feet. Pedals are often rectangle-shaped, but there are a range of other shapes (e.g., the circle-shaped Fuzz Face). Typical simple stompboxes have a single footswitch, one to three potentiometers (\"pots\" or \"knobs\") for controlling the effect, and a single LED that indicates if the effect is on. A typical distortion or overdrive pedal's three potentiometers, for example, control the level or intensity of the distortion effect, the tone of the effected signal and the volume (level) of the effected signal. Depending on the type of pedal, the potentiometers may control different parameters of the effect. For a chorus effect, for example, the knobs may control the depth and speed of the effect. Complex stompboxes may have multiple footswitches, many knobs, additional switches or buttons that are operated with the fingers, and an alphanumeric LED display that indicates the status of the effect with short acronyms (e.g., DIST for \"distortion\").\nSome pedals have two knobs stacked on top of each other, enabling the unit to provide two knobs per single knob space.\nAn \"effects chain\" or \"signal chain\" is formed by connecting two or more stompboxes. Effect chains are typically created between the guitar and the amp or between the preamplifier (\"preamp\") and the power amp. When a pedal is off or inactive, the electric audio signal coming into the pedal diverts onto a \"bypass\", an unaltered \"dry\" signal that continues on to other effects down the chain. In this way, a musician can combine effects within a chain in a variety of ways without having to reconnect boxes during a performance.\nA \"controller\" or \"effects management system\" lets the musician create multiple effect chains, so they can select one or several chains by tapping a single switch. The switches are usually organized in a row or a simple grid.\nTo preserve the clarity of the tone, it is most common to put compression, wah and overdrive pedals at the start of the chain; modulation (chorus, flanger, phase shifter) in the middle; and time-based units (delay/echo, reverb) at the end. When using many effects, unwanted noise and hum can be introduced into the sound. Some performers use a noise gate pedal at the end of a chain to reduce unwanted noise and hum introduced by overdrive units or vintage gear.\nRackmounts.\nRackmounted effects are typically built in a thin metal chassis with metal \"ears\" designed to be screwed into a 19-inch rack that is standard to the telecommunication, computing and music technology industries. Rackmounted effects may be one, two or three rack spaces high. When purchased from the store, rack-mounted equipment is not equipped with the rugged chassis features used on stompboxes and amps that are designed to be transported as standalone units, such as corner protectors. Rackmounted units are typically mounted in a rack, which is housed in a road case, a tough plastic case with removable front and rear covers that can be latched on during transportation to protect the knobs and switches and then removed during performances. A rackmount unit may contain electronic circuitry identical to a stompbox's, although its circuits are typically more complex. Unlike stompboxes, rackmounts usually have several different types of effects.\nRackmounts are most commonly used in recording studios and \"front of house\" live sound mixing situations, though professional musicians who play electric bass, electric guitar, or synthesizers may use them in place of stompboxes, to create a rackmounted head unit for their speaker cabinet(s). Rackmounts are controlled by knobs, switches or buttons on their front panel, and often by a MIDI digital control interface. During live performances, a musician can operate rackmounted effects using a \"foot controller\". By setting up effects in a rack-mounted road case, this speeds up set-up and tear-down, because all of the effects can be connected together with patch cords (which can be left connected permanently) and all of the units can be plugged into a power bar. This means that a musician only needs to plug in the main power bar into AC Mains power and plug their instrument into the rack, and the last effect unit's output into their instrument amplifier and/or the PA system.\n\"Shock mount\" racks are designed for musicians who frequently move gear between venues. Shock mounts help to protect electronic devices from bumps during transportation. Devices that are less than 19\u00a0inches wide may use special \"ear\" adapters to mount on a rack.\nMulti-effects and tabletop units.\nA multi-effects device (also called a \"multi-FX\" device) is a single electronics effects pedal or rackmount device that contains many different electronic effects. Multi-FX devices allow users to \"preset\" combinations of different effects, allowing musicians quick on-stage access to different effects combinations. Multi-effects units typically have a range of distortion, chorus, flanger, phaser and reverb effects. The most expensive multi-effects units may also have looper functions. Pedal-style multieffects range from fairly inexpensive stompboxes that contain two pedals and a few knobs to control the effects to large, expensive floor units with many pedals and knobs. Rackmounted multieffects units are typically mounted in a rack. Guitarists and bassists may mount their rackmounted multieffects unit in the same rack with their preamplifier and power amplifier.\nA tabletop unit is a type of multi-effects device that sits on a desk and is controlled manually. One such example is the Pod guitar amplifier modeler. Digital effects designed for DJs are often sold in tabletop models, so that the units can be placed alongside a DJ mixer, turntables and CD scratching gear. For a DJ, a pedal located on the floor would not be practical because she/he would find it hard to adjust the knobs.\nBuilt-in units.\nEffects are often incorporated into amplifiers and even some types of instruments. Electric guitar amplifiers typically have built-in reverb and distortion, while acoustic guitar and keyboard amplifiers tend to only have built-in reverb. Some acoustic instrument amplifiers have reverb, chorus, compression and equalization (bass and treble) effects. Vintage guitar amps (and their 2010-era reissued models) typically have tremolo and vibrato effects, and sometimes reverb. The Fender Bandmaster Reverb amp, for example, had built-in reverb and vibrato. Built-in effects may offer the user less control than standalone pedals or rackmounted units. For example, on some lower- to mid-priced bass amplifiers, the only control on the audio compression effect is a button or switch to turn it on or off, or a single knob. In contrast, a pedal or rackmounted unit would typically provide ratio, threshold and attack knobs and sometimes \"soft knee\" or other options to allow the user to control the compression.\nSince the 2000s, guitar amplifiers began having built-in multi-effects units or digital amplifier modeling effects. Bass amplifiers are less likely to have built-in effects, although some may have a compressor/limiter or fuzz bass effect. Bass amps from the 1980s sometimes included built-in bass chorus.\nInstruments with built-in effects include Hammond organs, electronic organs, electronic pianos and digital synthesizers. Built-in effects for keyboard typically include reverb, chorus and, for Hammond organ, vibrato. Many \"clonewheel organs\" include an overdrive effect. Occasionally, acoustic-electric and electric guitars will have built-in effects, such as a preamp or equalizer.\nHistory.\nStudio effects and early stand alone units.\nThe earliest sound effects were strictly studio productions. In the mid to late 1940s, recording engineers and experimental musicians such as Les Paul began manipulating reel-to-reel recording tape to create echo effects and unusual, futuristic sounds. Microphone placement (\"miking\") techniques were used in spaces with specially designed acoustic properties to simulate echo chambers. In 1948 DeArmond released the Trem-Trol, the first commercially available stand-alone effects unit. This device produced a tremolo by passing an instrument's electrical signal through a water-based electrolytic fluid. Most stand-alone effects of the 1950s and early 60s such as the Gibson GA-VI vibrato unit and the Fender reverb box, were expensive and impractical, requiring bulky transformers and high voltages. The original stand-alone units were not especially in-demand as many effects came built into amplifiers. The first popular stand-alone was the 1958 Watkins Copicat, a relatively portable tape echo effect made famous by the British band, The Shadows.\nAmplifiers.\nEffects built into guitar amplifiers were the first effects that musicians used regularly outside the studio. From the late 1940s onward, the Gibson Guitar Corp. began including vibrato circuits in combo amplifiers. The 1950 Ray Butts EchoSonic amp was the first to feature the spring reverb \"echo\" sound, which quickly became popular with guitarists such as Chet Atkins, Carl Perkins, Scotty Moore, Luther Perkins, and Roy Orbison. By the 1950s, tremolo, vibrato and reverb were available as built-in effects on many guitar amplifiers. Both Premier and Gibson built tube-powered amps with spring reverb. Fender began manufacturing the tremolo amps Tremolux in 1955 and Vibrolux in 1956.\nDistortion was not an effect originally intended by amplifier manufacturers, but could often easily be achieved by \"overdriving\" the power supply in early tube amplifiers. In the 1950s, guitarists began deliberately increasing gain beyond its intended levels to achieve \"warm\" distorted sounds. Among the first musicians to experiment with distortion were Willie Johnson of Howlin' Wolf, Goree Carter, Joe Hill Louis, Ike Turner, Guitar Slim, and Chuck Berry.\nIn 1954 Pat Hare produced heavily distorted power chords for several recordings (including James Cotton's \"), creating \"a grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound,\" accomplished by turning the volume knob on his amplifier \"all the way to the right until the speaker was screaming.\" Link Wray's 1958 recording \"Rumble\" inspired young musicians such as Pete Townshend of The Who, Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, Jeff Beck, Dave Davies of The Kinks, and Neil Young to explore distortion by various means. In 1966, the British company Marshall Amplification began producing the Marshall 1963, a guitar amplifier capable of producing the distorted \"crunch\" that rock musicians were starting to seek.\nStompboxes.\nThe electronic transistor finally made it possible to cram the aural creativity of the recording studio into small, highly portable stompbox units. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes, allowing for much more compact formats and greater stability. The first transistorized guitar effect was the 1962 Maestro Fuzz Tone pedal, which became a sensation after its use in the 1965 Rolling Stones hit \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\".\nWarwick Electronics manufactured the first wah-wah pedal, The Clyde McCoy, in 1967 and that same year Jim Morris of Kelsey-Morris Sound developed the first octave effect, which Jimi Hendrix named \"Octavio\". In 1968, Univox began marketing Shin-ei's Uni-Vibe pedal, an effect designed by noted audio engineer Fumio Mieda that mimicked the odd phase shift and chorus effects of the Leslie rotating speakers used in Hammond organs. The pedals soon became favorite effects of guitarists Jimi Hendrix and Robin Trower. Upon first hearing the Octavia, Hendrix allegedly rushed back to the studio and immediately used it to record the guitar solos on \"Purple Haze\" and \"Fire\". In 1976, Roland subsidiary Boss Corporation released the CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, the first chorus pedal, created by taking a chorus circuit from an amplifier and putting it into a stompbox. By the mid-1970s a variety of solid-state effects pedals including flangers, chorus pedals, ring modulators and phase shifters were available.\nIn the 1980s, digital rackmount units began replacing stompboxes as the effects format of choice. Often musicians would record \"dry\", unaltered tracks in the studio and effects would be added in post-production. The success of Nirvana's 1991 album \"Nevermind\" helped to re-ignite interest in stompboxes. Some grunge guitarists would chain several fuzz pedals together and plug them into a tube amplifier. Throughout the 1990s, musicians committed to a \"lo-fi\" aesthetic such as J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr., Stephen Malkmus of Pavement and Robert Pollard of Guided by Voices continued to use analog effects pedals.\nEffects and effects units\u2014stompboxes in particular\u2014have been celebrated by pop and rock musicians in album titles, songs and band names. The Big Muff, a fuzzbox manufactured by Electro-Harmonix, is commemorated by the Depeche Mode song \"Big Muff\" and the Mudhoney EP \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\". Nine Inch Nails, Pink Floyd, George Harrison, They Might Be Giants and Joy Division are among the many musicians who have referenced effects units in their music.\nTypes.\nDistortion.\nDistortion effects create \"warm\", \"gritty\", and \"fuzzy\" sounds by \"clipping\" an instrument's audio signal, which distorts the shape of its wave form and adds overtones. Distortion effects are sometimes called \"gain\" effects, as distorted guitar sounds were first achieved by increasing the electric power supply, e.g. gain, to tube amplifiers.\nDistortion and overdrive: Distortion and overdrive units re-shape or \"clip\" an audio signal's wave form so that it has flattened peaks, creating \"warm\" sounds by adding harmonics or \"gritty\" sounds by adding inharmonic overtones. In tube amplifiers, distortion is created by compressing the instrument's out-going electrical signal in vacuum tubes or \"valves\". Distortion pedals produce perfectly flattened peaks or \"hard\" clipping. Overdrive pedals produce \"soft\" tube-like distortion by compressing the sine wave without completely flattening it. Much like tube amps, overdrive units produce \"clean\" sounds at quieter volumes and distorted \"warm\" sounds at louder volumes. Distortion and overdrive pedals may either be transistor-based or digital. While distortion pedals are most associated with electric guitar, they are also used with bass guitar (fuzz bass), Hammond organ and electric piano.\nDistortion and overdrive effects: Boss DS-1 Distortion, Ibanez Tube Screamer, Marshall ShredMaster, MXR Distortion +, Pro Co RAT.\nFuzz: A fuzz pedal or \"fuzzbox\" is a type of overdrive pedal that clips a sound-wave until it is nearly a squarewave, resulting in a heavily distorted or \"fuzzy\" sound. Fuzzboxes may contain frequency multiplier circuitry to achieve a harsh timbre by adding complex harmonics. The Rolling Stones' song \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\", with the main riff played by Keith Richards with fuzz guitar, greatly popularized the use of fuzz effects. Fuzz bass (also called \"bass overdrive\") is a style of playing the electric bass that produces a buzzy, overdriven sound via a tube or transistor amp or by using a fuzz or overdrive pedal.\nFuzz effects: Arbiter Fuzz Face, Electro-Harmonix Big Muff, Shin-ei Companion FY-2, Univox Super-Fuzz, Vox Tone Bender, Z.Vex Fuzz Factory.\nDynamics.\nAlso called volume and amplitude effects, dynamics effects modify the volume of an instrument. Dynamics effects were among the first effects introduced to guitarists.\nBoost/volume pedal: A boost or \"clean boost\" pedal amplifies the volume of an instrument by increasing the amplitude of its audio signal. These units are generally used for \"boosting\" volume during solos and preventing signal loss in long \"effects chains\". A guitarist switching from rhythm guitar to lead guitar for a guitar solo may use a boost to increase the volume of their solo.\nTreadle-based volume pedals are used by electric instrument players (guitar, bass, keyboards) to adjust the volume of their instrument with one foot while their hands are being used to play their instrument. Treadle-style volume pedals are often also used to create swelling effects by removing the attack of a note or chord, as popularised by pedal steel guitar players. This enables electric guitar and pedal steel players to imitate the soft swelling sound that an orchestra string section can produce, in which a note or chord starts very softly and then grows in volume. Treadle-based volume pedals do not usually have batteries or require external power.\nVolume effects: Electro-Harmonix LPB-1, Fender Volume Pedal, MXR Micro Amp, Ernie Ball Volume Pedal.\nCompressor: Compressors make loud sounds quieter and quiet sounds louder by decreasing or \"compressing\" the dynamic range of an audio signal. A compressor is often used to stabilize volume and smooth a note's \"attack\" by dampening its onset and amplifying its sustain. A compressor can also function as a limiter with extreme settings of its controls.\nCompressor effects: Keeley Compressor, MXR Dyna Comp, Boss CS-3 Compression Sustainer.\nNoise gate: Noise gates attenuate hum, hiss, and static in the signal by greatly diminishing the volume when the signal falls below a set threshold. Noise gates are often used by electric guitarist who play with vintage amps, which can have unwanted hum in the tone, and by guitarists from heavy metal who use high distortion levels, which add noise to the signal even when no notes are being played. Noise gates mute the signal when it falls below a certain threshold. This means that during bars of rest for the guitarist in a song, the hum or noise from the amp or distortion pedal will not be heard by the audience. Noise gates are expanders\u2014meaning that, unlike compressors, they increase the dynamic range of an audio signal to make quiet sounds even quieter. If used with extreme settings and combined with reverb, they can create unusual sounds, such as the gated drum effect used in 1980s pop songs, a style popularized by the Phil Collins song \"In the Air Tonight\".\nNoise gate effects: Boss NS-2 Noise Suppressor.\nFilter.\nFilter effects alter the frequency content of an audio signal that passes through them by either boosting or weakening specific frequencies or frequency regions.\nEqualizer: An equalizer is a set of linear filters that strengthen (\"boost\") or weaken (\"cut\") specific frequency regions. While basic home stereos often have equalizers for two bands, to adjust bass and treble, professional graphic equalizers offer much more targeted control over the audio frequency spectrum. Audio engineers use highly sophisticated equalizers to eliminate unwanted sounds, make an instrument or voice more prominent, and enhance particular aspects of an instrument's tone.\nEqualizer effects: Boss GE-7 Equalizer, MXR 10-band EQ Pedal.\nTalk box: A talk box directs the sound from an electric guitar or synthesizer into the mouth of a performer using a tube, allowing the sound to be shaped into vowels and consonants with movements of the mouth. The modified sound is then picked up by a microphone. In this way the guitarist is able create the effect that the guitar \"licks\" are \"talking\". Some famous uses of the talkbox include Bon Jovi's \"Livin' on a Prayer\", Stevie Wonder's \"Black Man\", M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's \"Kickstart My Heart\", Joe Walsh's \"Rocky Mountain Way\", Alice in Chains's \"Man in the box\" and Peter Frampton's \"Show Me the Way\".\nTalk boxes: Dunlop HT1 Heil Talk Box, Rocktron Banshee.\nWah-wah: A wah-wah pedal creates vowel-like sounds by altering the frequency spectrum produced by an instrument\u2014i.e., how loud it is at each separate frequency\u2014in what is known as a spectral glide or \"sweep\".\nThe device is operated by a foot treadle that opens and closes a potentiometer. Wah-wah pedals are often used by funk and rock guitarists.\nWah effects: Dunlop Cry Baby, Morley Power Wah, Musitronics Mu-Tron III.\nModulation.\n\"Modulation\", in general electronics, means the altering of signal strength. In audio devices, modulation is a control feature that varies the strength of some effect over time to alter tonal properties. Some modulation effects mix (\"modulate\") an instrument's audio signal with a signal generated by the effect called a carrier wave. Other modulation effects split an instrument's audio signal in two, altering one portion of the signal and mixing it with the unaltered portion.\nChorus: Chorus pedals mimic the effect choirs and string orchestras produce naturally, by having slight variations in timbre and pitch, by mixing sounds with slight differences in timbre and pitch. A chorus effect splits the instrument-to-amplifier audio signal, and adds a slight delay and frequency variations or \"vibrato\" to part of the signal while leaving the rest unaltered. A well-known usage of chorus is the lead guitar in \"Come As You Are\" by Nirvana.\nChorus effects: Boss CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, Electro-Harmonix Small Clone, TC Electronic Stereo Chorus.\nFlanger: A flanger creates a \"whooshing\" \"jet plane\" or \"spaceship\" sound, simulating a studio effect that was first produced by recording a track on two synchronized tapes and periodically slowing one tape by pressing the edge of its reel (the \"flange\"). When the two tapes' audio signals are later mixed, a comb filter effect can be heard. Flanger units add a variably delayed version of the audio signal to the original or signal, creating a comb filter or Doppler effect. Some famous uses of flanger effects include \"Walking on the Moon\" by The Police, the intro to \"Ain't Talkin' 'Bout Love\" by Van Halen, and \"Barracuda\" by Heart.\nFlanger effects: Electro-Harmonix Electric Mistress, MXR Flanger, Boss BF-3 Flanger.\nPhaser: A phaser or \"phase shifter\" creates a slight rippling effect\u2014amplifying some aspects of the tone while diminishing others\u2014by splitting an audio signal in two and altering the phase of one portion. Three well-known examples of phaser are the two handed tapping part on the Van Halen instrumental \"Eruption\" and the keyboard parts on Billy Joel's \"Just the Way You Are\" and Paul Simon's \"Slip Slidin' Away\".\nPhase shift effects: Uni-Vibe, Electro-Harmonix Small Stone, MXR Phase 90.\nRing modulator: A ring modulator produces a resonant, metallic sound by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave generated by the device's internal oscillator. The original sound wave is suppressed and replaced by a \"ring\" of inharmonic higher and lower pitches or \"sidebands\". A notable use of ring modulation is the guitar in the Black Sabbath song \"Paranoid\".\nRing modulator effects: Moogerfooger MF-102 Ring Modulator.\nTremolo: A tremolo effect produces a slight, rapid variation in the volume of a note or chord. The \"tremolo effect\" should not be confused with the misleadingly-named \"tremolo bar\", a device on a guitar bridge that creates a vibrato or pitch-bending effect. In transistorized effects, a tremolo is produced by modulating an instrument's audio signal with a sub-audible carrier wave in such a way that generates amplitude variations in the sound wave. Tremolo effects are built-in effects in some vintage guitar amplifiers. The guitar intro in the Rolling Stones' \"Gimme Shelter\" features a tremolo effect.\nTremolo effects: Demeter TRM-1 Tremulator, Fender Tremolux.\nSlicer: Combines a modulation sequence with a noise gate or envelope filter to create a percussive and rhythmic effect like a helicopter.\nVibrato: Vibrato effects produce slight, rapid variations in pitch, mimicking the fractional semitone variations produced naturally by opera singers and violinists when they are prolonging a single note. Vibrato effects often allow the performer to control the rate of the variation as well as the difference in pitch (e.g. \"depth\"). A vibrato with an extreme \"depth\" setting (e.g., half a semitone or more) will produce a dramatic, ululating sound. In transistorized effects, vibrato is produced by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave in such a way that generates frequency variations in the sound wave. Guitarists often use the terms \"vibrato\" and \"tremolo\" misleadingly. A so-called \"vibrato unit\" in a guitar amplifier actually produces tremolo, while a \"tremolo arm\" or \"whammy bar\" on a guitar produces vibrato.\nVibrato effects: Boss VB-2 Vibrato.\nPitch/frequency.\nPitch/frequency effects modify pitch by altering the frequency of a sound wave or sound signal or adding new harmonies.\nPitch shifter and harmonizer: A pitch shifter (also called an \"octaver\" for effects that shift pitch by an octave) raises or lowers (e.g. \"transposes\") each note a performer plays by a pre-set interval. For example, a pitch shifter set to increase the pitch by a fourth will raise each note four diatonic intervals above the notes actually played. Simple, less expensive pitch shifters raise or lower the pitch by one or two octaves, while more sophisticated and expensive devices offer a range of interval alterations. A pitch shifter can be used by an electric guitarist to play notes that would normally only be available on an electric bass. As well, a bass player with a four string electric bass can use an octave pedal to obtain low notes that would normally only be obtainable with a five-string bass with a low \"B\" string.\nA harmonizer is a type of sophisticated pitch shifter that combines the altered pitch with the original pitch to create a two note harmony based on the original pitch, or even with some pedals, three note harmony. Some hamonizers are able to create chorus-like effects by adding very tiny shifts in pitch.\nPitch shift effects: DigiTech Whammy, Electro-Harmonix POG.\nTime-based.\nTime-based effects delay the sound signal, add reverb or echos, or, if a long delay is possible, enable musicians to record \"loops\".\nDelay/echo: Delay/echo units produce an echo effect by adding a duplicate instrument-to-amplifier electrical signal to the original signal at a slight time-delay. The effect can either be a single echo called a \"slap\" or \"slapback,\" or multiple echos. A well-known use of delay is the lead guitar in the U2 song \"Where the Streets Have No Name\", and also the opening riff of \"Welcome to the Jungle\" by Guns N'Roses.\nDelay effects: Boss DD-3 Digital Delay, MXR Carbon Copy, Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Memory Man, Line 6 DL4, Roland RE-201.\nLooper pedal: A looper pedal or \"phrase looper\" allows a performer to record and later replay a phrase, riff or passage from a song. Loops can be created on the spot during a performance (live looping) or they can be pre-recorded. By using a looper pedal, a singer-guitarist in a one person band can play the backing chords (or riffs) to a song, loop them with the pedal, and then sing and do a guitar solo over the chords. Some units allow a performer to layer multiple loops, enabling the performer to create the effect of a full band. The first loop effects were created with reel-to-reel tape using a tape loop. High-end boutique tape loop effects are still used by some studio producers who want a vintage sound. Digital loop effects recreate this effect using an electronic memory.\nReverb: Reverb units simulate the spacious sounds produced naturally in a huge stone cathedral (or other acoustic space such as a hall or room). This is done by creating a large number of echoes that gradually fade away in volume or \"decay\". One early technique for creating a reverb effect was to send an amplified signal of the music via a speaker to another room with reflective surfaces, such as a tile bathroom, and then record the natural reverberations that were produced. A plate reverb system uses an electromechanical transducer to create vibrations in a plate of metal. Spring reverb systems, which are often used in guitar amplifiers, use a transducer to create vibrations in a spring. Digital reverb effects use various signal processing algorithms to create the reverb effect, often by using multiple feedback delay circuits. Rockabilly and surf guitar are two genres that make heavy use of reverb.\nReverb effects: Electro-Harmonix Holy Grail, Fender Reverb Unit.\nFeedback/sustain.\nAudio feedback: Audio feedback is an effect produced when amplified sound is picked up by a microphone or guitar pickup and played back through a guitar amplifier, initiating a \"feedback loop\", which usually consists of high-pitched sound. Feedback that occurs from a vocal mic into a PA system is almost always avoided. However, in some styles of rock music, electric guitar players intentionally create feedback by playing their instrument directly in front of a heavily amplified, distorted guitar amplifier's speaker enclosure. The creative use of feedback effects was pioneered by guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix in the 1960s. This technique creates sustained, high-pitched overtones and unusual sounds not possible through regular playing techniques. Guitar feedback effects can be difficult to perform, because it is difficult to determine the sound volume and guitar position relative to a guitar amp's loudspeaker necessary for achieving the desired feedback sound. Guitar feedback effects are used in a number of rock genres, including psychedelic rock, heavy metal music and punk rock.\nEBow is a brand name of Heet Sound Products, of Los Angeles, California, for a small, handheld, battery-powered resonator. The Ebow was invented by Greg Heet, as a way to make a note on an electric guitar string resonate continuously, creating an effect that sounds similar to a bowed violin note or a sustained pipe organ note. The resonator uses a pickup \u2013 inductive string driver \u2013 feedback circuit, including a sensor coil, driver coil, and amplifier, to induce forced string resonance. The Ebow brand resonator is monophonic, and drives only one string at a time.\nOther handheld and mounted guitar and bass resonators have been on the market since the early 1990s, produced in Germany under the SRG brand, which ceased production in 2016, and were available in both monophonic (one string at a time) and polyphonic (multiple strings at a time) models, which included multiple onboard trigger switch effects, such as HPF (high pass filter) for enhancing harmonics and producing feedback effects, and LPF (low pass filter), producing a bass boost with a cello sound on heavy gauge strings. &lt;ref&gt;"}
{"id": "10166", "revid": "1633464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10166", "title": "Enron", "text": "Enron Corporation was an American energy, commodities, and services company based in Houston, Texas. It was founded in 1985 as a merger between Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth, both relatively small regional companies. Before its bankruptcy on December 3, 2001, Enron employed approximately 29,000 staff and was a major electricity, natural gas, communications and pulp and paper company, with claimed revenues of nearly $101\u00a0billion during 2000. \"Fortune\" named Enron \"America's Most Innovative Company\" for six consecutive years.\nAt the end of 2001, it was revealed that Enron's reported financial condition was sustained by an institutionalized, systemic and creatively planned accounting fraud, known since as the Enron scandal. Enron has since become a well-known example of willful corporate fraud and corruption. The scandal also brought into question the accounting practices and activities of many corporations in the United States and was a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act of 2002. The scandal also affected the greater business world by causing the dissolution of the Arthur Andersen accounting firm, which had been Enron's main auditor for years.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy in the Southern District of New York in late 2001 and selected Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges as its bankruptcy counsel. It ended its bankruptcy during November 2004, pursuant to a court-approved plan of reorganization. A new board of directors changed the name of Enron to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp., and emphasized reorganizing and liquidating certain operations and assets of the pre-bankruptcy Enron. On September 7, 2006, Enron sold Prisma Energy International Inc., its last remaining business, to Ashmore Energy International Ltd. (now AEI).\nHistory.\nPre-merger origins (1925\u20131985).\nInterNorth.\nOne of Enron's primary predecessors was InterNorth, which was formed in 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska just a few months after Black Tuesday. The low cost of natural gas and cheap labor supply during the Great Depression helped to fuel the company's early beginnings. The company doubled in size by 1932 and was able to bring the first natural gas to Minnesota. Over the next 50 years, Northern expanded even more as it acquired many energy companies. It was reorganized in 1979 as the main subsidiary of a holding company, InterNorth, which was a diversified energy and energy-related products company. Although most of the acquisitions conducted were successful, some ended poorly. InterNorth competed with Cooper Industries over a hostile takeover of Crouse-Hinds Company, an electrical products manufacturer. InterNorth was ultimately unsuccessful as Cooper bought out Crouse-Hinds. Cooper and InterNorth feuded over numerous suits during the course of the takeover that were eventually settled after the transaction was completed. The subsidiary Northern Natural Gas operated the largest natural gas pipeline company in North America. By the 1980s, InterNorth became a major force for natural gas production, transmission, and marketing as well as for natural gas liquids, and was an innovator in the plastics industry. In 1983, InterNorth merged with the Belco Petroleum Company, a Fortune 500 oil exploration and development company founded by Arthur Belfer.\nHouston Natural Gas.\nThe Houston Natural Gas (HNG) corporation was initially formed from the Houston Oil Co. in 1925 to provide gas to customers in the Houston market through the building of gas pipelines. Under the leadership of CEO Robert Herring from 1967 to 1981, the company took advantage of the unregulated Texas natural gas market and the commodity surge in the early 1970s and became a dominant force in the energy industry with a large pipeline network. Toward the end of the 1970s, HNG's luck began to run out with rising gas prices forcing clients to switch to oil. In addition, with the passing of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the Texas market was more difficult to profit from and as a result, HNG's profits fell. After Herring's death in 1981, M.D. Matthews briefly took over as CEO in a 3-year stint with initial success, but ultimately, a big dip in earnings led to his exit. In 1984, Kenneth Lay succeeded Matthews and inherited the troubled, but large diversified energy conglomerate.\nMerger.\nInterNorth, in its conservative success, became a target of corporate takeovers, the most prominent being corporate raider Irwin Jacobs. InterNorth CEO Sam Segnar, in searching for a company to merge with to fend off takeover attempts as a poison pill, discovered HNG. In May 1985, Internorth acquired HNG for $2.3 billion, 40% higher than the current market price, in order to avoid the corporate takeover attempt. The combined assets of the two companies would create the second largest gas pipeline system at the time in the United States. Internorth\u2019s north-south pipelines that served Iowa and Minnesota complemented HNG\u2019s Florida and California east-west pipelines well.\nPost-merger rise (1985\u20131991).\nThe company was initially named \"HNG/InterNorth Inc.\", even though InterNorth was technically the parent. At the outset, Segnar was CEO for a short time, before he was fired by the Board of Directors whereupon Lay was tapped to be the new CEO. Lay moved the headquarters of the new company back to energy capital Houston. The company then set out to find a new name, spent upwards of $100,000 in focus groups and consulting before \"Enteron\" was suggested. The name was eventually dismissed over its apparent likening to an intestine and shortened to \"Enron\". (The distinctive logo was one of the final major projects of legendary graphic designer Paul Rand before his death in 1996.) Enron still had some lingering problems left over from its merger, however. The company had to pay Jacobs, who was still a threat, over $350 million and reorganize the company. Lay sold off any parts of the company that he believed didn't belong in the long-term future of Enron. Lay consolidated all the gas pipeline efforts under the Enron Gas Pipeline Operating Company. In addition, the company began to ramp up its electric power and natural gas efforts. In 1988 and 1989, the company began adding power plants and cogeneration units to its portfolio. In 1989, Jeffrey Skilling, then a consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company, came up with the idea to link natural gas to consumers in more ways, effectively turning natural gas into a commodity. Enron adopted the idea and called it the \"Gas Bank\". The division's success prompted Skilling to join Enron as the head of the Gas Bank in 1991. Another major development inside Enron was the beginning of the company's pivot to overseas that was expanded upon in the 1990s. Starting in 1989, the company received a $56 million loan from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) for a power plant in Argentina.\n1991\u20132000.\nOver the course of the 1990s, Enron made a few changes to its business plan that greatly improved the perceived profitability of the company. First, Enron invested heavily in overseas assets, specifically energy. Another major shift was the gradual transition of focus from a producer of energy to a company that acted more like an investment firm and sometimes a hedge fund, making profits off the margins of the products it traded. These products were traded through the Gas Bank concept, now called the Enron Finance Corp. headed by Skilling.\nOperations as a trading firm.\nWith the success of the Gas Bank trading natural gas, Skilling looked to expand the horizons of his division, Enron Capital &amp; Trade. Skilling hired Andrew Fastow in 1990 to help with this.\nEntrance into the retail energy market.\nStarting in 1994 under the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Congress allowed states to deregulate their electricity utilities, allowing them to be opened for competition. California was one such state to do so. Enron, seeing an opportunity with rising prices, was eager to jump into the market. In 1997, Enron acquired Portland General Electric (PGE). Although an Oregon utility, it had potential to begin serving the massive California market since PGE was a regulated utility. The new Enron division, Enron Energy, ramped up its efforts by offering discounts to potential customers in California for switching their electric supplier to Enron from their previous supplier, starting in 1998. Enron Energy also began to sell natural gas to customers in Ohio and wind power in Iowa. However, in 1999, the company ended its retail endeavor, only offering wholesale energy as it was revealed it was spending upwards of $100 million a year.\nData management.\nAs fiber optic technology progressed in the 1990s, multiple companies, including Enron, attempted to make money by \"keeping the continuing network costs low,\" which was done by owning their own network. In 1997, FTV Communications LLC, a limited liability company formed by Enron subsidiary FirstPoint Communications, Inc., Williams Communications Group, Inc. and Touch America. FTV constructed a 1,380 mile fiber optic network between Portland and Las Vegas. In 1998, Enron constructed a building in a rundown area of Las Vegas near E Sahara, building right over the \"backbone\" of fiber optic cables providing service to technology companies nationwide. The location had the ability to send \"the entire Library of Congress anywhere in the world within minutes\" and could stream \"video to the whole state of California\". The location was also more protected from natural disasters than areas such as Los Angeles or the East Coast. According to \"Wall Street Daily\", \"Enron had a secret,\" it \"wanted to trade bandwidth like it traded oil, gas, electricity, etc. It launched a secret plan to build an enormous amount of fiber optic transmission capacity in Las Vegas ... it was all part of Enron\u2019s plan to essentially own the internet.\" Enron sought to have all US internet service providers rely on their Nevada facility to supply bandwidth, which Enron would sell in a fashion similar to other commodities.\nIn January 2000, Kenneth Lay and Jeffrey Skilling announced to analysts that they were going to open trading for their own \"high-speed fiber-optic networks that form the backbone for Internet traffic\". Investors quickly bought Enron stock following the announcement \"as they did with most things Internet-related at the time\", with stock prices rising from $40 per share in January 2000 to $70 per share in March, peaking at $90 in the summer of 2000. Enron executives obtained windfall gains from the rising stock prices, with a total of $924 million of stocks sold by high-level Enron employees between 2000 and 2001. Head of Enron Broadband Services, Kenneth Rice, sold 1 million shares himself, earning about $70 million in returns. As prices of existing fiber optic cables plummeted due to the vast oversupply of the system, with only 5% of the 40 million miles being active wires, Enron purchased the inactive \"dark fibers\", expecting to buy them at low cost and then make a profit as the need for more usage by internet providers increased, with Enron expecting to lease its acquired dark fibers in 20 year contracts to providers. However, Enron's accounting would use estimates to determine how much their dark fiber would be worth when \"lit\" and apply those estimates to their current income, adding exaggerated revenue to their accounts since transactions were not yet made and it was not known if the cables would ever be active. Enron's trading with other energy companies within the broadband market was its attempt to lure large telecommunications companies, such as Verizon Communications, into its broadband scheme to create its own new market.\nBy the second quarter of 2001, Enron Broadband Services was reporting losses. On March 12, 2001, a proposed 20-year deal between Enron and Blockbuster Inc. to stream movies on demand over Enron's connections was cancelled, with Enron shares dropping from $80 per share in mid-February 2001 to below $60 the week after the deal was killed. The branch of the company that Jeffrey Skilling \"said would eventually add $40 billion to Enron's stock value\" added only about $408 million in revenue for Enron in 2001, with the company's broadband arm closed shortly after its meager second-quarter earnings report in July 2001.\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Enron, telecommunications holdings were sold for \"pennies on the dollar\". In 2002, Rob Roy of Switch Communications purchased Enron's Nevada facility in an auction attended only by Roy. Enron's \"fiber plans were so secretive that few people even knew about the auction.\" The facility was sold for only $930,000. Following the sale, Switch expanded to control \"the biggest data center in the world\".\nOverseas expansion.\nEnron, seeing stability after the merger, began to look overseas for new possible energy opportunities in 1991. Enron's first such opportunity was a natural gas power plant utilizing cogeneration that the company built in Teesside, UK. The power plant was so large it could produce up to 3% of the United Kingdom's electricity demand with a capacity of over 1,875 megawatts. Seeing the success in England, the company developed and diversified its assets worldwide under the name of Enron International (EI), headed by former HNG executive Rebecca Mark. By 1994, EI's portfolio included assets in The Philippines, Australia, Guatemala, Germany, France, India, Argentina, the Caribbean, China, England, Colombia, Turkey, Bolivia, Brazil, Indonesia, Norway, Poland, and Japan. The division was becoming a large share of earnings for Enron, contributing 25% of earnings in 1996. Mark and EI believed the water industry was the next market to be deregulated by authorities and seeing the potential, searched for ways to enter the market, similar to PGE.\nIn 1998, Enron International acquired Wessex Water for $2.88 billion. Wessex Water became the core asset of a new company, Azurix, which expanded to other water companies. After Azurix's promising IPO in June 1999, Enron \"sucked out over $1 billion in cash while loading it up with debt,\" according to Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, authors of \"\". Additionally, British water regulators required Wessex to cut its rates by 12% starting in April 2000, and an upgrade was required of the utility's aging infrastructure, estimated at costing over a billion dollars. By the end of 2000 Azurix had an operating profit of less than $100 million and was $2 billion in debt. In August 2000, after Azurix stock took a plunge following its earnings report, Mark resigned from Azurix and Enron. Azurix assets, including Wessex, were eventually sold by Enron.\nMisleading financial accounts.\nIn 1990, Enron's Chief Operating Officer Jeffrey Skilling hired Andrew Fastow, who was well acquainted with the burgeoning deregulated energy market that Skilling wanted to exploit. In 1993, Fastow began establishing numerous limited liability special-purpose entities, a common business practice in the energy industry. However, this also allowed Enron to transfer some of its liabilities so that they would not appear in its accounts, allowing it to maintain a robust and generally increasing stock price and thus keeping its critical investment grade credit ratings.\nEnron was originally involved in transmitting and distributing electricity and natural gas throughout the United States. The company developed, built, and operated power plants and pipelines while dealing with rules of law and other infrastructures worldwide. Enron owned a large network of natural gas pipelines, which stretched coast to coast and border to border including Northern Natural Gas, Florida Gas Transmission, Transwestern Pipeline company and a partnership in Northern Border Pipeline from Canada. The states of California, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island had already passed power deregulation laws by July 1996, the time of Enron's proposal to acquire Portland General Electric corporation. During 1998, Enron began operations in the water sector, creating the Azurix Corporation, which it part-floated on the New York Stock Exchange during June 1999. Azurix failed to become successful in the water utility market, and one of its major concessions, in Buenos Aires, was a large-scale money-loser.\nEnron grew wealthy due largely to marketing, promoting power, and its high stock price. Enron was named \"America's Most Innovative Company\" by the magazine \"Fortune\" for six consecutive years, from 1996 to 2001. It was on the \"Fortune\"s \"100 Best Companies to Work for in America\" list during 2000, and had offices that were stunning in their opulence. Enron was hailed by many, including labor and the workforce, as an overall great company, praised for its large long-term pensions, benefits for its workers and extremely effective management until the exposure of its corporate fraud. The first analyst to question the company's success story was Daniel Scotto, an energy market expert at BNP Paribas, who issued a note in August 2001 entitled \"Enron: All stressed up and no place to go\", which encouraged investors to sell Enron stocks, although he only changed his recommendation on the stock from \"buy\" to \"neutral\".\nAs was later discovered, many of Enron's recorded assets and profits were inflated or even wholly fraudulent and nonexistent. One example of fraudulent records was during 1999 when Enron promised to repay Merrill Lynch's investment with interest in order to show a profit on its books. Debts and losses were put into entities formed \"offshore\" that were not included in the company's financial statements, and other sophisticated and arcane financial transactions between Enron and related companies were used to eliminate unprofitable entities from the company's books.\nThe company's most valuable asset and the largest source of honest income, the 1930s-era Northern Natural Gas company, was eventually purchased by a group of Omaha investors, who relocated its headquarters back to Omaha; it is now a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Energy. NNG was established as collateral for a $2.5\u00a0billion capital infusion by Dynegy Corporation when Dynegy was planning to buy Enron. When Dynegy examined Enron's financial records carefully, they repudiated the deal and dismissed their CEO, Chuck Watson. The new chairman and CEO, the late Daniel Dienstbier, had been president of NNG and an Enron executive at one time and was forced out of Enron by Ken Lay. Dienstbier was an acquaintance of Warren Buffett. NNG continues to be profitable now.\n2001 accounting scandals.\nIn 2001, after a series of revelations involving irregular accounting procedures perpetrated throughout the 1990s involving Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen that bordered on fraud, Enron filed for the then largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy in history (since surpassed by those of Worldcom during 2002 and Lehman Brothers during 2008), resulting in $11 billion in shareholder losses.\nAs the scandal progressed, Enron share prices decreased from US $90.56 during the summer of 2000, to just pennies. Enron had been considered a blue chip stock investment, so this was an unprecedented event in the financial world. Enron's demise occurred after the revelation that much of its profit and revenue were the result of deals with special-purpose entities (limited partnerships which it controlled). This meant that many of Enron's debts and the losses that it suffered were not reported in its financial statements.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy on December 2, 2001. In addition, the scandal caused the dissolution of Arthur Andersen, which at the time was one of the \"Big Five\" - the world's foremost accounting firms. The company was found guilty of obstruction of justice during 2002 for destroying documents related to the Enron audit. Since the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons, Andersen was forced to stop auditing public companies. Although the conviction was dismissed in 2005 by the Supreme Court, the damage to the Andersen name has prevented it from reviving as a viable business even on a limited scale. Also, the court ruling was little comfort to the thousands of now unemployed Andersen employees.\nEnron also withdrew a naming-rights deal with the Houston Astros Major League Baseball club to have its name associated with their new stadium, which was known formerly as Enron Field (now Minute Maid Park).\nAccounting practices.\nEnron used a variety of deceptive, bewildering, and fraudulent accounting practices and tactics to cover its fraud in reporting Enron's financial information. Special-purpose entities were created to mask significant liabilities from Enron's financial statements. These entities made Enron seem more profitable than it actually was, and created a dangerous spiral in which, each quarter, corporate officers would have to perform more and more financial deception to create the illusion of billions of dollars in profit while the company was actually losing money. This practice increased their stock price to new levels, at which point the executives began to work on insider information and trade millions of dollars' worth of Enron stock. The executives and insiders at Enron knew about the offshore accounts that were hiding losses for the company; the investors, however, did not. Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow directed the team which created the off-books companies, and manipulated the deals to provide himself, his family, and his friends with hundreds of millions of dollars in guaranteed revenue, at the expense of the corporation for which he worked and its stockholders.\nDuring 1999, Enron initiated EnronOnline, an Internet-based trading operation, which was used by virtually every energy company in the United States. By promoting the company's aggressive investment strategy, Enron president and chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling helped make Enron the biggest wholesaler of gas and electricity, trading over $27\u00a0billion per quarter. The corporation's financial claims, however, had to be accepted at face value. Under Skilling, Enron adopted mark-to-market accounting, in which anticipated future profits from any deal were tabulated as if currently real. Thus, Enron could record gains from what over time might turn out to be losses, as the company's fiscal health became secondary to manipulating its stock price on Wall Street during the so-called Tech boom. But when a company's success is measured by undocumented financial statements, actual balance sheets are inconvenient. Indeed, Enron's unscrupulous actions were often gambles to keep the deception going and so increase the stock price. An advancing price meant a continued infusion of investor capital on which debt-ridden Enron in large part subsisted (much like a financial \"pyramid\" or \"Ponzi scheme\"). Attempting to maintain the illusion, Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street analyst Richard Grubman, who questioned Enron's unusual accounting practice during a recorded conference telephone call. When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements, Skilling replied, \"Well, thank you very much, we appreciate that ... asshole.\" Though the comment was met with dismay and astonishment by press and public, it became an inside joke among many Enron employees, mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling's offensiveness.\nPost-bankruptcy.\nEnron initially planned to retain its three domestic pipeline companies as well as most of its overseas assets. However, before emerging from bankruptcy, Enron sold its domestic pipeline companies as CrossCountry Energy for $2.45 billion and later sold other assets to Vulcan Capital Management.\nEnron sold its last business, Prisma Energy, during 2006, leaving Enron asset-less. During early 2007, its name was changed to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation. Its goal is to repay the old Enron's remaining creditors and end Enron's affairs.\nAzurix, the former water utility part of the company, remains under Enron ownership, although it is currently asset-less. It is involved in several litigations against the government of Argentina claiming compensation relating to the negligence and corruption of the local governance during its management of the Buenos Aires water concession during 1999, which resulted in substantial amounts of debt (approx. $620\u00a0million) and the eventual collapse of the branch.\nSoon after emerging from bankruptcy during November 2004, Enron's new board of directors sued 11 financial institutions for helping Lay, Fastow, Skilling and others hide Enron's true financial condition. The proceedings were dubbed the \"megaclaims litigation\". Among the defendants were Royal Bank of Scotland, Deutsche Bank and Citigroup. , Enron has settled with all of the institutions, ending with Citigroup. Enron was able to obtain nearly $7.2 billion to distribute to its creditors as a result of the megaclaims litigation. As of December 2009, some claim and process payments were still being distributed.\nEnron has been featured since its bankruptcy in popular culture, including in The Simpsons episodes \"That '90s Show\" (Homer buys Enron stocks while Marge chooses to keep her own Microsoft stocks) and Special Edna, which features a scene of an Enron-themed amusement park ride. The 2007 film \"Bee Movie\" also featured a joke reference to a parody company of Enron called \"Honron\" (a play on the words honey and Enron). The 2017 book \"Bittersweet Symphony\" by Rebecca McNutt featured main character Bailey Kane discussing Enron while remarking, \"in devastation there is opportunity, you know.\" The book also mentions in passing that deceased Enron executive J. Clifford Baxter \"tried to complain, he tried to live with it, he tried to do the right thing but nobody heard him...\" The 2003 documentary \"The Corporation\" made frequent references to Enron post-bankruptcy, calling the company a \"bad apple\".\nInsider trading scandal.\nPeak and decline of stock price.\nDuring August 2000, Enron's stock price attained its greatest value of $90.56. At this time Enron executives, who possessed inside information on the hidden losses, began to sell their stock. At the same time, the general public and Enron's investors were told to buy the stock. Executives told the investors that the stock would continue to increase until it attained possibly the $130 to $140 range, while secretly unloading their shares.\nAs executives sold their shares, the price began to decrease. Investors were told to continue buying stock or hold steady if they already owned Enron because the stock price would rebound in the near future. Kenneth Lay's strategy for responding to Enron's continuing problems was his demeanor. As he did many times, Lay would issue a statement or make an appearance to calm investors and assure them that Enron was doing well. In March 2001 an article by Bethany McLean appeared in \"Fortune\" magazine noting that no one understood how the company made money and questioning whether Enron stock was overvalued.\nBy August 15, 2001, Enron's stock price had decreased to $42. Many of the investors still trusted Lay and believed that Enron would rule the market. They continued to buy or retain their stock as the equity value decreased. As October ended, the stock had decreased to $15. Many considered this a great opportunity to buy Enron stock because of what Lay had been telling them in the media.\nLay was accused of selling more than $70 million worth of stock at this time, which he used to repay cash advances on lines of credit. He sold another $29 million worth of stock in the open market. Also, Lay's wife, Linda, was accused of selling 500,000 shares of Enron stock totaling $1.2\u00a0million on November 28, 2001. The money earned from this sale did not go to the family but rather to charitable organizations, which had already received pledges of contributions from the foundation. Records show that Mrs. Lay made the sale order sometime between 10:00 and 10:20\u00a0am. News of Enron's problems, including the millions of dollars in losses they hid, became public about 10:30 that morning, and the stock price soon decreased to less than one dollar.\nFormer Enron executive Paula Rieker was charged with criminal insider trading and sentenced to two years probation. Rieker obtained 18,380 Enron shares for $15.51 a share. She sold that stock for $49.77 a share during July 2001, a week before the public was told what she already knew about the $102\u00a0million loss. In 2002, after the tumultuous fall of Enron's external auditor, and management consultant, Andersen LLP, former Andersen Director, John M. Cunningham coined the phrase, \"We have all been Enroned.\"\nThe fallout resulted in both Lay and Skilling being convicted of conspiracy, fraud, and insider trading. Lay died before sentencing, Skilling got 24 years and 4 months and a $45 million penalty (later reduced). Fastow was sentenced to six years of jail time, and Lou Pai settled out of court for $31.5 million.\nCalifornia's deregulation and subsequent energy crisis.\nIn October 2000, Daniel Scotto, the most renowned utility analyst on Wall Street, suspended his ratings on all energy companies conducting business in California because of the possibility that the companies would not receive full and adequate compensation for the deferred energy accounts used as the basis for the California Deregulation Plan enacted during the late 1990s. Five months later, Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (PG&amp;E) was forced into bankruptcy. Republican Senator Phil Gramm, husband of Enron Board member Wendy Gramm and also the second-largest recipient of campaign contributions from Enron, succeeded in legislating California's energy commodity trading deregulation. Despite warnings from prominent consumer groups which stated that this law would give energy traders too much influence over energy commodity prices, the legislation was passed in December 2000.\nAs the periodical Public Citizen reported, \"Because of Enron's new, unregulated power auction, the company's 'Wholesale Services' revenues quadrupled\u2014- from $12\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2000 to $48.4\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2001.\"\nAfter the passage of the deregulation law, California had a total of 38 Stage 3 rolling blackouts declared, until federal regulators intervened during June 2001. These blackouts occurred as a result of a poorly designed market system that was manipulated by traders and marketers, as well as from poor state management and regulatory oversight. Subsequently, Enron traders were revealed as intentionally encouraging the removal of power from the market during California's energy crisis by encouraging suppliers to shut down plants to perform unnecessary maintenance, as documented in recordings made at the time. These acts contributed to the need for rolling blackouts, which adversely affected many businesses dependent upon a reliable supply of electricity, and inconvenienced a large number of retail customers. This scattered supply increased the price, and Enron traders were thus able to sell power at premium prices, sometimes up to a factor of 20x its normal peak value.\nThe callousness of the traders' attitude toward ratepayers was documented in an evidence tape of a conversation regarding the matter, and sarcastically referencing the confusion of retiree voters in Florida's Miami-Dade County in the November 2000, presidential election.\n\"They're fucking taking all the money back from you guys? All the money you guys stole from those poor grandmothers in California?\"\n\"Yeah, Grandma Millie man. But she's the one who couldn't figure out how to fucking vote on the butterfly ballot.\" (Laughing from both sides.)\n\"Yeah, now she wants her fucking money back for all the power you've charged right up, jammed right up her ass for fucking $250 a megawatt-hour.\"\nThe traders had been discussing the efforts of the Snohomish PUD in Southwestern Washington state to recover the massive overcharges that Enron had engineered. Morgan Stanley, which had taken Enron's place in the lawsuit, fought the release of the documents that the PUD had sought to make its case, but were being withheld by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.\nProducts.\nEnron traded in more than 30 different products, including the following:\nIt was also an extensive futures trader, including sugar, coffee, grains, hogs, and other meat futures. At the time of its bankruptcy filing during December 2001, Enron was structured into seven distinct business units.\nCapital and risk management services.\nProject development and management services.\nEnron manufactured gas valves, circuit breakers, thermostats, and electrical equipment in Venezuela by means of INSELA SA, a 50\u201350 joint venture with General Electric. Enron owned three paper and pulp products companies: Garden State Paper, a newsprint mill; as well as Papiers Stadacona and St. Aurelie Timberlands. Enron had a controlling stake in the Louisiana-based petroleum exploration and production company Mariner Energy.\nEnronOnline.\nEnron opened EnronOnline, an electronic trading platform for energy commodities, on November 29, 1999. Conceptualized by the company's European Gas Trading team, it was the first web-based transaction system that allowed buyers and sellers to buy, sell, and trade commodity products globally. It allowed users to do business only with Enron. The site allowed Enron to transact with participants in the global energy markets. The main commodities offered on EnronOnline were natural gas and electricity, although there were 500 other products including credit derivatives, bankruptcy swaps, pulp, gas, plastics, paper, steel, metals, freight, and TV commercial time. At its maximum, more than $6 billion worth of commodities were transacted by means of EnronOnline every day, but specialists questioned how Enron reported trades and calculated its profits, saying that the same fraudulent accounting that was rampant at Enron's other operations may have been used in trading.\nAfter Enron's bankruptcy in late 2001, EnronOnline was sold to the Swiss financial giant UBS. Within a year, UBS abandoned its efforts to relaunch the division, and closed it in November 2002.\nEnron International.\nEnron International (EI) was Enron's wholesale asset development and asset management business. Its primary emphasis was developing and building natural gas power plants outside North America. Enron Engineering and Construction Company (EECC) was a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron International, and built almost all of Enron International's power plants. Unlike other business units of Enron, Enron International had a strong cash flow on bankruptcy filing. Enron International consisted of all of Enron's foreign power projects, including ones in Europe.\nThe company's Teesside plant was one of the largest gas-fired power stations in the world, built and operated by Enron from 1989, and produced 3 percent of the United Kingdom's energy needs. Enron owned half of the plant's equity, with the remaining 50 per cent split between four regional electricity companies.\nManagement.\nRebecca Mark was the CEO of Enron International until she resigned to manage Enron's newly acquired water business, Azurix, during 1997. Mark had a major role in the development of the Dabhol project in India, Enron's largest international endeavor.\nProjects.\nEnron International constructed power plants and pipelines across the globe. Some are presently still operating, including the massive Teesside plant in England. Others, like a barge-mounted plant off Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic, cost Enron money by lawsuits and investment losses. Puerto Plata was a barge-mounted power plant next to the hotel \"Hotelero del Atlantico\". When the plant was activated, winds blew soot from the plant onto the hotel guests' meals, blackening their food. The winds also blew garbage from nearby slums into the plant's water-intake system. For some time the only solution was to hire men who would row out and push the garbage away with their paddles. Through mid-2000 the company collected a paltry $3.5\u00a0million from a $95\u00a0million investment. Enron also had other investment projects in Europe, South America, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Jamaica, Venezuela, and across the Caribbean.\nIndia.\nAround 1992 Indian experts came to the United States to find energy investors to help with India's energy shortage problems. During December 1993, Enron finalized a 20-year power-purchase contract with the Maharashtra State Electricity Board. The contract allowed Enron to construct a massive 2,015 megawatt power plant on a remote volcanic bluff south of Mumbai. Construction would be completed in two phases, and Enron would form the Dabhol Power Company to help manage the plant. The power project was the first step in a $20\u00a0billion scheme to help rebuild and stabilize India's power grid. Enron, GE (which was selling turbines to the project), and Bechtel (which was actually constructing the plant), each contributed 10% equity.\nDuring 1996, when India's Congress Party was no longer in power, the Indian government assessed the project as being excessively expensive and refused to pay for the plant and stopped construction. The Maharashtra State Electricity Board (MSEB), the local state-owned utility, was required by contract to continue to pay Enron plant maintenance charges, even if no power was purchased from the plant. The MSEB determined that it could not afford to purchase the power (at Rs. 8 per unit kWh) charged by Enron. The plant operator was unable to find alternate customers for Dabhol power due to the absence of a free market in the regulated structure of utilities in India. From 1996 until Enron's bankruptcy during 2001 the company tried to revive the project and revive interest in India's need for the power plant without success.\nProject summer.\nDuring the summer of 2001, Enron made an attempt to sell a number of Enron International's assets, many of which were not sold. The public and media believed it was unknown why Enron wanted to sell these assets, suspecting it was because Enron was in need of cash. Employees who worked with company assets were told in 2000 that Jeff Skilling believed that business assets were an outdated means of company worth, and instead he wanted to build a company based on \"intellectual assets\".\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production, Inc..\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production Inc. (EGEP) was an Enron subsidiary that was born from the split of domestic assets via EOG Resources (formerly Enron Oil and Gas EOG) and international assets via EGEP (formerly Enron Oil and Gas Int'l, Ltd EOGIL). \nAmong the EGEP assets were the Panna-Mukta and the South Tapti fields, discovered by the Indian state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), which operated the fields initially.\nDecember 1994, a joint venture began between ONGC (40%), Enron (30%) and Reliance (30%).\nMid year of 2002, British Gas (BG) completed the acquisition of EGEP's 30% share of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields for $350 million, a few months before Enron filed bankruptcy.\nEnron Prize for Distinguished Public Service.\nDuring the mid-1990s, Enron established an endowment for the Enron Prize for Distinguished Public Service, awarded by Rice University's Baker Institute to \"recognize outstanding individuals for their contributions to public service\". Recipients were:\nGreenspan, because of his position as the Fed chairman, was not at liberty to accept the $10,000 honorarium, the $15,000 sculpture, nor the crystal trophy, but only accepted the \"honor\" of being named an Enron Prize recipient. The situation was further complicated because a few days earlier, Enron had filed paperwork admitting it had falsified financial statements for five years. Greenspan did not mention Enron a single time during his speech. At the ceremony, Ken Lay stated, \"I'm looking forward to our first woman recipient.\" The next morning, it was reported in the \"Houston Chronicle\" that no decision had been made on whether the name of the prize would be changed. 19 days after the prize was awarded to Greenspan, Enron declared bankruptcy.\nDuring early 2002, Enron was awarded Harvard's (in)famous Ig Nobel Prize for 'Most Creative Use of Imaginary Numbers.' The various former members of Enron management team all refused to accept the award in person, although no reason was given at the time.\nReferences.\nhttps://www.econcrises.org/2016/12/07/enron-corporation-2001/"}
{"id": "10168", "revid": "33880752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10168", "title": "Eusebius of Alexandria", "text": "Eusebius of Alexandria is an author to whom certain extant homilies are attributed.\nBiography.\nNothing is known of the author. In all events, he was not a patriarch of Alexandria, as is affirmed in an early biography, written by one Johannes, a notary, and stating that Eusebius was called by Cyril to be his successor in the episcopate.\nThere has been much dispute regarding the details of his life and the age in which he lived. Galland (Vet. Patr. Biblioth., VIII, 23) says: \"de Eusebio qui vulgo dicitur episcopus Alexandr\u00e6 incerta omnia\" (Concerning Eusebius, commonly called bishop of Alexandria there is nothing sure). His writings have been attributed to Eusebius of Emesa, Eusebius of C\u00e6sarea, and others. According to an old biography said to have been written by his notary, the monk John, and discovered by Cardinal Mai, he lived in the fifth century and led a monastic life near Alexandria. The fame of his virtues attracted the attention of Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, who visited him with his clergy, and in 444, when dying, had him elected his successor, and consecrated him bishop, though much against his will. Eusebius displayed great zeal in the exercise of his office and did much good by his preaching. Among those he converted was a certain Alexander, a man of senatorial rank. After having ruled his see for seven or, according to another account, for twenty years, he made Alexander his successor and retired to the desert, whence Cyril had summoned him and there died in the odor of sanctity.\nWhile Mai seems to have established the existence of a Eusebius of Alexandria who lived in the fifth century, it had been objected than neither the name of Eusebius or his successor Alexander, appears in the list of the occupants of that ancient see. Dioscurus is mentioned as the immediate successor of Cyril. Nor does the style of the homilies seem on the whole in keeping with the age of Cyril. It may be noted, however, that the biographer of Eusebius expressly states that the Cyril in question is the great opponent of Nestorius. Various solution of the difficulty have been proposed. Thilo thinks that the authorship of the homilies is to be assigned either to a certain monk \u2013 one of four brothers 3 of the fifth century, or to a presbyter and court chaplain of Justinian I, who took an active part in the theological strifes of the sixth century. Mai suggests that after the death of Cyril, there were two bishops at Alexandria, Dioscurus, the Monophysite leader, and Eusebius, the head of the Catholic party. The homilies cover a variety of subjects, and the author is one of the earliest patristic witnesses to the doctrine regarding the descent of Christ into Hell. A list of homilies with the complete text is given by Mai. They may also be found in Migne, which was published with an introduction by Rand in \"Modern Philology\", II, 261.\nWorks.\nThese homilies enjoyed some renown in the Eastern Church in the sixth and seventh centuries.\nThe discourses belong probably to the fifth or sixth century, and possibly originated in Alexandria. They deal with the life of Jesus of Nazareth and with questions of ecclesiastical life and practise, which they resolve in a monastic-ascetic way. Their literary character is not quite clear; while most of them are adapted for public delivery, not a few bear the character of ecclesiastical pronouncements. They are now in print except four included among John Chrysostom's works. The fragments preserved in the so-called \"Sacra parallela\" are to be found in Karl Holl's \"Fragmente vornic\u00e4nischer Kirchenv\u00e4ter.\" A homily concerning the observance of Sunday is attributed by Zahn to Eusebius of Emesa."}
{"id": "10169", "revid": "398607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10169", "title": "Eusebius of Angers", "text": "Eusebius (Bruno) of Angers (died September 1, 1081) was bishop of Angers, France.\nHe first appears in the historical record as bishop of Angers at the synod of Rheims in 1049, and for a long time had been an adherent of Berengar's doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As such he was regarded by Berengar himself and by his opponents Theodwin of Li\u00e8ge, Durand of Troarne, and Humbert of Mourmoutiers. But when he recognized the strength of the opposition, he favored a compromise; at any rate he advised Berengar is 1054 to swear to the formula presented to him.\nNevertheless, Berengar considered him his friend many years later and requested him to silence a certain Galfrid Martini or to arrange a disputation. In his reply Eusebius not only regretted the whole controversy, but also stated that he would abide by the words of the Bible, according to which the bread and wine after the consecration become the body and blood of the Lord (see transubstantiation); if one asks how this can take place, the answer must be that it is not according to the order of nature but in accordance with the divine omnipotence; at any rate one must be careful not to give offense to the plain Christian. The epistle is a downright renunciation of Berengar in case he should still maintain his view.\nIn favor of the supposition that Eusebius changed his opinion from deference to the Count of Anjou, the decided opponent of Berengar and his doctrine, it can be adduced that he did not defend Berengar against the hostilities of the court, and that for a long time he sided with this violent prince. It is also possible that the fact impressed itself upon Eusebius that the religious consciousness of the time more and more opposed Berengar. Our knowledge, however, is too fragmentary to pass a very accurate sentence."}
{"id": "10172", "revid": "9193806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10172", "title": "Eusebius", "text": "Eusebius of Caesarea (; , \"Eus\u00e9bios t\u00e9s Kaisare\u00edas\"; AD\u00a0260/265\u00a0\u2013 339/340), also known as Eusebius Pamphili (from the ), was a historian of Christianity, exegete, and Christian polemicist. He became the bishop of Caesarea Maritima about AD 314. Together with Pamphilus, he was a scholar of the biblical canon and is regarded as one of the most learned Christians of his time. He wrote \"Demonstrations of the Gospel\", \"Preparations for the Gospel\" and \"On Discrepancies between the Gospels\", studies of the biblical text. As \"Father of Church History\" (not to be confused with the title of Church Father), he produced the \"Ecclesiastical History\", \"On the Life of Pamphilus\", the \"Chronicle\" and \"On the Martyrs\". He also produced a biographical work on Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, who was \"augustus\" between AD 306 and AD 337.\nAlthough Eusebius' works are regarded as giving insight into the history of the early church, he was not without prejudice, especially in regard to the Jews, for while \"Eusebius indeed blames the Jews for the crucifixion of Jesus, he nevertheless also states that forgiveness can be granted even for this sin and that the Jews can receive salvation.\" Some scholars question the accuracy of Eusebius' works. For example, at least one scholar, Lynn Cohick, dissents from the majority view that Eusebius is correct in identifying the Melito of \"Peri Pascha\" with the Quartodeciman bishop of Sardis. Cohick claims as support for her position that \"Eusebius is a notoriously unreliable historian, and so anything he reports should be critically scrutinized.\" Eusebius' \"Life of Constantine\", which he wrote as a eulogy shortly after the emperor's death in AD 337, is \"often maligned for perceived factual errors, deemed by some so hopelessly flawed that it cannot be the work of Eusebius at all.\" Others attribute this perceived flaw in this particular work as an effort at creating an overly idealistic hagiography, calling him a \"Constantinian flunky\" since, as a trusted adviser to Constantine, it would be politically expedient for him to present Constantine in the best light possible. He is recognized as a saint in the Egyptian Coptic Church and the Ethiopian Church.\nSources.\nLittle is known about the life of Eusebius. His successor at the See of Caesarea, Acacius, wrote a \"Life of Eusebius\", a work that has since been lost. Eusebius' own surviving works probably only represent a small portion of his total output. Beyond notices in his extant writings, the major sources are the 5th-century ecclesiastical historians Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, and the 4th-century Christian author Jerome. There are assorted notices of his activities in the writings of his contemporaries Athanasius, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Alexander of Alexandria. Eusebius' pupil, Eusebius of Emesa, provides some incidental information.\nEarly life.\nMost scholars date the birth of Eusebius to some point between AD 260 and AD 265 . He was most likely born in or around Caesarea Maritima. Nothing is known about his parents. He was baptized and instructed in the city, and lived in Syria Palaestina in 296, when Diocletian's army passed through the region (in the \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius recalls seeing Constantine traveling with the army). \nEusebius was made presbyter by Agapius of Caesarea. Some, like theologian and ecclesiastical historian John Henry Newman, understand Eusebius' statement that he had heard Dorotheus of Tyre \"expound the Scriptures wisely in the Church\" to indicate that Eusebius was Dorotheus' pupil while the priest was resident in Antioch; others, like the scholar D. S. Wallace-Hadrill, deem the phrase too ambiguous to support the contention.\nThrough the activities of the theologian Origen (185/6\u2013254) and the school of his follower Pamphilus (later 3rd century \u2013 309), Caesarea became a center of Christian learning. Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information, or which churches were using which gospels, regarding the texts which became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the \"Ecclesiastical History\" [HE] of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.\nOn his deathbed, Origen had made a bequest of his private library to the Christian community in the city. Together with the books of his patron Ambrosius, Origen's library (including the original manuscripts of his works) formed the core of the collection that Pamphilus established. Pamphilus also managed a school that was similar to (or perhaps a re-establishment of) that of Origen. Pamphilus was compared to Demetrius of Phalerum and Pisistratus, for he had gathered Bibles \"from all parts of the world\". Like his model Origen, Pamphilus maintained close contact with his students. Eusebius, in his history of the persecutions, alludes to the fact that many of the Caesarean martyrs lived together, presumably under Pamphilus.\nSoon after Pamphilus settled in Caesarea (\"ca\". 280s), he began teaching Eusebius, who was then somewhere between twenty and twenty-five. Because of his close relationship with his schoolmaster, Eusebius was sometimes called \"Eusebius Pamphili\": \"Eusebius, son of Pamphilus\". The name may also indicate that Eusebius was made Pamphilus' heir. Pamphilus gave Eusebius a strong admiration for the thought of Origen. Neither Pamphilus nor Eusebius knew Origen personally; Pamphilus probably picked up Origenist ideas during his studies under Pierius (nicknamed \"Origen Junior\") in Alexandria. \nEusebius' \"Preparation for the Gospel\" bears witness to the literary tastes of Origen: Eusebius quotes no comedy, tragedy, or lyric poetry, but makes reference to all the works of Plato and to an extensive range of later philosophic works, largely from Middle Platonists from Philo to the late 2nd century. Whatever its secular contents, the primary aim of Origen and Pamphilus' school was to promote sacred learning. The library's biblical and theological contents were more impressive: Origen's \"Hexapla\" and \"Tetrapla\"; a copy of the original Aramaic version of the Gospel of Matthew; and many of Origen's own writings. Marginal comments in extant manuscripts note that Pamphilus and his friends and pupils, including Eusebius, corrected and revised much of the biblical text in their library. Their efforts made the hexaplaric Septuagint text increasingly popular in Syria and Palestine. Soon after joining Pamphilus' school, Eusebius started helping his master expand the library's collections and broaden access to its resources. At about this time Eusebius compiled a \"Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms\", presumably for use as a general reference tool.\nIn the 290s, Eusebius began work on his most important work, the \"Ecclesiastical History\", a narrative history of the Church and Christian community from the Apostolic Age to Eusebius' own time. At about the same time, he worked on his \"Chronicle\", a universal calendar of events from the Creation to, again, Eusebius' own time. He completed the first editions of the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and \"Chronicle\" before 300.\nBishop of Caesarea.\nEusebius succeeded Agapius as Bishop of Caesarea soon after 313 and was called on by Arius who had been excommunicated by his bishop Alexander of Alexandria. An episcopal council in Caesarea pronounced Arius blameless. Eusebius enjoyed the favor of the Emperor Constantine. Because of this he was called upon to present the creed of his own church to the 318 attendees of the Council of Nicaea in 325. However, the anti-Arian creed from Palestine prevailed, becoming the basis for the Nicene Creed.\nThe theological views of Arius, that taught the subordination of the Son to the Father, continued to be controversial. Eustathius of Antioch strongly opposed the growing influence of Origen's theology, as the root of Arianism. Eusebius, an admirer of Origen, was reproached by Eustathius for deviating from the Nicene faith. Eusebius prevailed and Eustathius was deposed at a synod in Antioch.\nHowever, Athanasius of Alexandria became a more powerful opponent and in 334 he was summoned before a synod in Caesarea (which he refused to attend). In the following year, he was again summoned before a synod in Tyre at which Eusebius of Caesarea presided. Athanasius, foreseeing the result, went to Constantinople to bring his cause before the Emperor. Constantine called the bishops to his court, among them Eusebius. Athanasius was condemned and exiled at the end of 335. Eusebius remained in the Emperor's favour throughout this time and more than once was exonerated with the explicit approval of the Emperor Constantine. After the Emperor's death (c. 337), Eusebius wrote the \"Life of Constantine\", an important historical work because of eyewitness accounts and the use of primary sources.\nDeath.\nMuch like his birth, the exact date of Eusebius' death is unknown. However, there is primary text evidence from a council held in Antioch that by the year 341, his successor Acacius had already filled the seat as Bishop. Socrates and Sozomen write about Eusebius' death, and place it just before Constantine's son Constantine II died, which was in early 340. They also say that it was after the second banishment of Athanasius, which began in mid 339. This means that his death occurred some time between the second half of 339 and early 340.\nWorks.\nOf the extensive literary activity of Eusebius, a relatively large portion has been preserved. Although posterity suspected him of Arianism, Eusebius had made himself indispensable by his method of authorship; his comprehensive and careful excerpts from original sources saved his successors the painstaking labor of original research. Hence, much has been preserved, quoted by Eusebius, which otherwise would have been lost.\nThe literary productions of Eusebius reflect on the whole the course of his life. At first, he occupied himself with works on biblical criticism under the influence of Pamphilus and probably of Dorotheus of Tyre of the School of Antioch. Afterward, the persecutions under Diocletian and Galerius directed his attention to the martyrs of his own time and the past, and this led him to the history of the whole Church and finally to the history of the world, which, to him, was only a preparation for ecclesiastical history.\nThen followed the time of the Arian controversies, and dogmatic questions came into the foreground. Christianity at last found recognition by the State; and this brought new problems \u2013 apologies of a different sort had to be prepared. Lastly, Eusebius wrote eulogies in praise of Constantine. To all this activity must be added numerous writings of a miscellaneous nature, addresses, letters, and the like, and exegetical works that extended over the whole of his life and that include both commentaries and an important treatise on the location of biblical place names and the distances between these cities.\nBiblical text criticism.\nPamphilus and Eusebius occupied themselves with the textual criticism of the Septuagint text of the Old Testament and especially of the New Testament. An edition of the Septuagint seems to have been already prepared by Origen, which, according to Jerome, was revised and circulated by Eusebius and Pamphilus. For an easier survey of the material of the four Evangelists, Eusebius divided his edition of the New Testament into paragraphs and provided it with a synoptical table so that it might be easier to find the pericopes that belong together. These canon tables or \"Eusebian canons\" remained in use throughout the Middle Ages, and illuminated manuscript versions are important for the study of early medieval art, as they are the most elaborately decorated pages of many Gospel books. Eusebius detailed in \"Epistula ad Carpianum\" how to use his canons.\n\"Chronicle\".\nThe \"Chronicle\" ( (\"Pantodape historia\")) is divided into two parts. The first part, the \"Chronography\" ( (\"Chronographia\")), gives an epitome of universal history from the sources, arranged according to nations. The second part, the \"Canons\" ( (\"Chronikoi kanones\")), furnishes a synchronism of the historical material in parallel columns, the equivalent of a parallel timeline.\nThe work as a whole has been lost in the original Greek, but it may be reconstructed from later chronographists of the Byzantine school who made excerpts from the work, especially George Syncellus. The tables of the second part have been completely preserved in a Latin translation by Jerome, and both parts are still extant in an Armenian translation. The loss of the Greek originals has given the Armenian translation a special importance; thus, the first part of Eusebius' \"Chronicle\", of which only a few fragments exist in the Greek, has been preserved entirely in Armenian, though with lacunae. The \"Chronicle\" as preserved extends to the year 325.\n\"Church History\".\nIn his \"Church History\" or \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius wrote the first surviving history of the Christian Church as a chronologically-ordered account, based on earlier sources, complete from the period of the Apostles to his own epoch. The time scheme correlated the history with the reigns of the Roman Emperors, and the scope was broad. Included were the bishops and other teachers of the Church, Christian relations with the Jews and those deemed heretical, and the Christian martyrs through 324. Although its accuracy and biases have been questioned, it remains an important source on the early church due to Eusebius's access to materials now lost.\n\"Life of Constantine\".\nEusebius' \"Life of Constantine\" (\"Vita Constantini\") is a eulogy or panegyric, and therefore its style and selection of facts are affected by its purpose, rendering it inadequate as a continuation of the \"Church History.\" As the historian Socrates Scholasticus said, at the opening of his history which was designed as a continuation of Eusebius, \"Also in writing the life of Constantine, this same author has but slightly treated of matters regarding Arius, being more intent on the rhetorical finish of his composition and the praises of the emperor than on an accurate statement of facts.\" The work was unfinished at Eusebius' death. Some scholars have questioned the Eusebian authorship of this work.\nConversion of Constantine according to Eusebius.\nWriting decades after Constantine had died, Eusebius claimed that the emperor himself had recounted to him that some time between the death of his father \u2013 the \"augustus\" Constantius \u2013 and his final battle against his rival Maxentius as \"augustus\" in the West, Constantine experienced a vision in which he and his soldiers beheld a Christian symbol, \"a cross-shaped trophy formed from light\", above the sun at midday. Attached to the symbol was the phrase \"by this conquer\" (), a phrase often rendered into Latin as \"in hoc signo vinces\". In a dream that night \"the Christ of God appeared to him with the sign which had appeared in the sky, and urged him to make himself a copy of the sign which had appeared in the sky, and to use this as a protection against the attacks of the enemy.\" Eusebius relates that this happened \"on a campaign he [Constantine] was conducting somewhere\". It is unclear from Eusebius's description whether the shields were marked with a Christian cross or with a \"chi-rho\", a staurogram, or another similar symbol.\nThe Latin text \"De mortibus persecutorum\" contains an early account of the 28 October 312 Battle of the Milvian Bridge written by Lactantius probably in 313, the year following the battle. Lactantius does not mention a vision in the sky but describes a revelatory dream on the eve of battle. Eusebius's work of that time, his \"Church History\", also makes no mention of the vision. The Arch of Constantine, constructed in AD 315, neither depicts a vision nor any Christian insignia in its depiction of the battle. In his posthumous biography of Constantine, Eusebius agrees with Lactantius that Constantine received instructions in a dream to apply a Christian symbol as a device to his soldiers' shields, but unlike Lactantius and subsequent Christian tradition, Eusebius does not date the events to October 312 and does not connect Constantine's vision and dream-vision with the Battle of the Milvian Bridge.\nMinor historical works.\nBefore he compiled his church history, Eusebius edited a collection of martyrdoms of the earlier period and a biography of Pamphilus. The martyrology has not survived as a whole, but it has been preserved almost completely in parts. It contained:\nOf the life of Pamphilus, only a fragment survives. A work on the martyrs of Palestine in the time of Diocletian was composed after 311; numerous fragments are scattered in legendaries which have yet to be collected. The life of Constantine was compiled after the death of the emperor and the election of his sons as Augusti (337). It is more a rhetorical eulogy on the emperor than a history but is of great value on account of numerous documents incorporated into it.\nApologetic and dogmatic works.\nTo the class of apologetic and dogmatic works belong:\nA number of writings, belonging in this category, have been entirely lost.\nExegetical and miscellaneous works.\nAll of the exegetical works of Eusebius have suffered damage in transmission. The majority of them are known to us only from long portions quoted in Byzantine catena-commentaries. However these portions are very extensive. Extant are:\nEusebius also wrote a work \"Quaestiones ad Stephanum et Marinum\", \"On the Differences of the Gospels\" (including solutions). This was written for the purpose of harmonizing the contradictions in the reports of the different Evangelists. This work was recently (2011) translated into the English language by David J. Miller and Adam C. McCollum and was published under the name \"Eusebius of Caesarea: Gospel Problems and Solutions\". The original work was also translated into Syriac, and lengthy quotations exist in a \"catena\" in that language, and also in Coptic and Arabic catenas.\nEusebius also wrote treatises on the biblical past; these three treatises have been lost. They were:\nThe addresses and sermons of Eusebius are mostly lost, but some have been preserved, e.g., a sermon on the consecration of the church in Tyre and an address on the thirtieth anniversary of the reign of Constantine (336).\nMost of Eusebius' letters are lost. His letters to Carpianus and Flacillus exist complete. Fragments of a letter to the empress Constantia also exists.\nDoctrine.\nEusebius is fairly unusual in his preterist, or fulfilled, eschatological view. Saying \"the Holy Scriptures foretell that there will be unmistakable signs of the Coming of Christ. Now there were among the Hebrews three outstanding offices of dignity, which made the nation famous, firstly the kingship, secondly that of prophet, and lastly the high priesthood. The prophecies said that the abolition and complete destruction of all these three together would be the sign of the presence of the Christ. And that the proofs that the times had come, would lie in the ceasing of the Mosaic worship, the desolation of Jerusalem and its Temple, and the subjection of the whole Jewish race to its enemies. ...The holy oracles foretold that all these changes, which had not been made in the days of the prophets of old, would take place at the coming of the Christ, which I will presently shew to have been fulfilled as never before in accordance with the predictions\" (\"Demonstratio Evangelica\" VIII).\nFrom a dogmatic point of view, Eusebius stands entirely upon the shoulders of Origen. Like Origen, he started from the fundamental thought of the absolute sovereignty (\"monarchia\") of God. God is the cause of all beings. But he is not merely a cause; in him everything good is included, from him all life originates, and he is the source of all virtue. God sent Christ into the world that it may partake of the blessings included in the essence of God. Eusebius expressly distinguishes the Son as distinct from Father as a ray is also distinct from its source the sun.\nEusebius held that men were sinners by their own free choice and not by the necessity of their natures. Eusebius said:\nThe Creator of all things has impressed a natural law upon the soul of every man, as an assistant and ally in his conduct, pointing out to him the right way by this law; but, by the free liberty with which he is endowed, making the choice of what is best worthy of praise and acceptance, he has acted rightly, not by force, but from his own free-will, when he had it in his power to act otherwise, As, again, making him who chooses what is worst, deserving of blame and punishment, because he has by his own motion neglected the natural law, and becoming the origin and fountain of wickedness, and misusing himself, not from any extraneous necessity, but from free will and judgment. The fault is in him who chooses, not in God. For God has not made nature or the substance of the soul bad; for he who is good can make nothing but what is good. Everything is good which is according to nature. Every rational soul has naturally a good free-will, formed for the choice of what is good. But when a man acts wrongly, nature is not to be blamed; for what is wrong, takes place not according to nature, but contrary to nature, it being the work of choice, and not of nature.\nA letter Eusebius is supposed to have written to Constantine's daughter Constantina, refusing to fulfill her request for images of Christ, was quoted in the decrees (now lost) of the Iconoclast Council of Hieria in 754, and later quoted in part in the rebuttal of the Hieria decrees in the Second Council of Nicaea of 787, now the only source from which some of the text is known. The authenticity or authorship of the letter remains uncertain.\nNicene Creed.\nIn the June 2002 issue of the \"Church History\" journal, Pier Beatrice reports that Eusebius testified that the word \"homoousios\" (consubstantial) \"was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine.\"\nAssessment.\nAlternate views have suggested that Gibbon's dismissal of Eusebius is inappropriate:\nWhile many have shared Burckhardt's assessment, particularly with reference to the \"Life of Constantine\", others, while not pretending to extol his merits, have acknowledged the irreplaceable value of his works which may principally reside in the copious quotations that they contain from other sources, often lost."}
{"id": "10173", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10173", "title": "Empiricist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10174", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10174", "title": "Empiricism", "text": "In philosophy, empiricism is a theory that states that knowledge comes only or primarily from sensory experience. It is one of several views of epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism. Empiricism emphasizes the role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions. However, empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sense experiences.\nHistorically, empiricism was associated with the \"blank slate\" concept (\"tabula rasa\"), according to which the human mind is \"blank\" at birth and develops its thoughts only through experience. \nEmpiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments. It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on \"a priori\" reasoning, intuition, or revelation.\nEmpiricism, often used by natural scientists, says that \"knowledge is based on experience\" and that \"knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification\". Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.\nEtymology.\nThe English term \"empirical\" derives from the Ancient Greek word \u1f10\u03bc\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03af\u03b1, \"empeiria\", which is cognate with and translates to the Latin \"experientia\", from which the words \"experience\" and \"experiment\" are derived.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nA central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be \"empirically\" based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment. The term \"semi-empirical\" is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms, established scientific laws, and previous experimental results in order to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.\nPhilosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience. This view is commonly contrasted with rationalism, which states that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses. For example, John Locke held that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly Robert Boyle, a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we have innate ideas. The main continental rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz) were also advocates of the empirical \"scientific method\".\nEarly empiricism.\nBetween 600 and 200 BCE.\nBetween 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy, founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada, accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge. This is enumerated in his work \"Vai\u015be\u1e63ika S\u016btra\".\nc. 330 \u2013 400 BCE.\nThe earliest Western proto-empiricists were the Empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE. Its members rejected the three doctrines of the Dogmatic school, preferring to rely on the observation of phantasiai (i.e., phenomena, the appearances). The Empiric school was closely allied with Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism. \nThe notion of \"tabula rasa\" (\"clean slate\" or \"blank tablet\") connotes a view of mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words \"white paper\") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas. The notion dates back to Aristotle, c. 350 BC:\nWhat the mind (\"nous\") thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet (\"grammateion\") which bears no actual writing (\"grammenon\"); this is just what happens in the case of the mind. (Aristotle, \"On the Soul\", 3.4.430a1).\nAristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality, and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active \"nous\". These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's \"Phaedo\" and \"Apology\", as well as others). Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato, and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as \"nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu\" (Latin for \"nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses\").\nThis idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE. Stoic epistemology generally emphasized that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as \"When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.\"\nIslamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE).\nDuring the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of \"tabula rasa\" was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi (c. 872 \u2013 951 CE), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c.\u2009980 \u2013 1037) and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail. For Avicenna (Ibn Sina), for example, the \"tabula rasa\" is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education, and knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" developed through a \"syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts\". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect (\"al-'aql al-hayulani\"), which is a potentiality \"that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect (\"al-'aql al-fa'il\"), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\". So the immaterial \"active intellect\", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.\nIn the 12th century CE the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebn Tophail\" in the West) included the theory of \"tabula rasa\" as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel, \"Hayy ibn Yaqdhan\" in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a \"tabula rasa\" to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island, through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel, entitled \"Philosophus Autodidactus\", published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke's formulation of \"tabula rasa\" in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\".\nA similar Islamic theological novel, \"Theologus Autodidactus\", was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.\nDuring the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to mind into scholasticism. Bonaventure (1221\u20131274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.\nRenaissance Italy.\nIn the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the \"effectual truth\" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519) said, \"If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings.\"\nSignificantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno, and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon, who regarded Telesio as \"the first of the moderns.\u201d Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers Ren\u00e9 Descartes and Pierre Gassendi.\nThe decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 \u2013 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody, made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his \"Dialogo della musica antica e moderna\" (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for \"experiment\" was \"esperienza\". It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed. \"Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei\"), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of 'Pythagoras' hammers' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded \"experience and demonstration\" as the \"sine qua non\" of valid rational enquiry.\nBritish empiricism.\nBritish empiricism, a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science. Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon, in England, advised empiricism at 1620, whereas Ren\u00e9 Descartes, in France, upheld rationalism around 1640, a distinction drawn by Immanuel Kant, in Germany, near 1780. (Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus.) Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively. In the Enlightenment during the 18th century, both George Berkeley, in England, and David Hume, in Scotland, became leading exponents of empiricism, a lead precedented in the late 17th century by John Locke, also in England, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy.\nIn response to the early-to-mid-17th century \"continental rationalism,\" John Locke (1632\u20131704) proposed in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1689) a very influential view wherein the \"only\" knowledge humans can have is \"a posteriori\", i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a \"tabula rasa\", a \"blank tablet\", in Locke's words \"white paper\", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written. There are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes.\nA generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop, George Berkeley (1685\u20131753), determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism. In response to Locke, he put forth in his \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things \"only\" exist either as a \"result\" of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text \"Alciphron\", Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God. Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism.\nThe Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711\u20131776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism. Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, \"Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities\u2014by \u2018proofs\u2019 meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition.\" And,\nHume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: \"relations of ideas\" and \"matters of fact\" (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. \"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides\") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. \"the sun rises in the East\") are examples of the second. All of people's \"ideas\", in turn, are derived from their \"impressions\". For Hume, an \"impression\" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an \"idea\". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.\nHume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason. Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated \"habits\", developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method\u2014that of the problem of induction. Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument. Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past. Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.\nHume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom. Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.\nPhenomenalism.\nMost of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is \"rationally\" unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit. According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism, anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences. Phenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist\u2014hence the closely related term subjective idealism. By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences. This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the \"permanent possibility of sensation\".\nMill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for \"all\" meaningful knowledge including mathematics. As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:\nMill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience. The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations. This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such \"groups of permanent possibilities of sensation\" might exist in the first place. Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered. In the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of \"reality\" that goes beyond mere \"possibilities of sensation\", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms. Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the \"gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all\". Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics. It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science, the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction.\nThe phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data. If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement. The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation. There is, however, no \"finite\" set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal. But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man).\nLogical empiricism.\nLogical empiricism (also \"logical positivism\" or \"neopositivism\") was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath, Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle, along with A.J. Ayer, Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach.\nThe neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848\u20131925) and Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies, they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the \"analytic\" (a priori) and the \"synthetic\" (a posteriori). On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called verification principle. Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.\nIn the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists\u2014at least before the 1930s\u2014any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of \"phenomenalism\" in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics. That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called \"protocol sentences\", for example, \"\"X\" at location \"Y\" and at time \"T\" observes such and such.\" The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman, W.V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, Karl Popper, and Richard Rorty. By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists.\nPragmatism.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose. The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s. James popularized the term \"pragmatism\", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of \"pragmaticism\". Along with its \"pragmatic theory of truth\", this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.\nCharles Peirce (1839\u20131914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method. Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright. Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation. In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the \"data-driven\" strict-empiricist view.\nAmong Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before. To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning. The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today. Peirce's approach \"presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them. According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism, the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth\".\nIn his Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the \"three cotary propositions of pragmatism\" (L: \"cos, cotis\" whetstone), saying that they \"put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism\". First among these he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street. That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses. Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference, its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique\u2014in a word, incorrigible. This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or \"thisness\"\u2014what the Scholastics called its \"haecceity\"\u2014that stands beyond control and correction. Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them. This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on \"indirect perception\".\nAround the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842\u20131910) coined the term \"radical empiricism\" to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism\u2014though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed \"directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support\", by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. James' \"radical empiricism\" is thus \"not\" radical in the context of the term \"empiricism\", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term \"empirical\". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.\nJohn Dewey (1859\u20131952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism. The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated. Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism was that reality is determined by past experience. Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience. The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, in physical sciences as in ethics. Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known \"a posteriori\"."}
{"id": "10175", "revid": "24812038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10175", "title": "Estampie", "text": "The estampie (, Occitan and , ) is a medieval dance and musical form which was a popular instrumental and vocal form in the 13th and 14th centuries. The name was also applied to poetry .\nMusical form.\nThe estampie is similar in form to the lai, consisting of a succession of repeated notes . According to Johannes de Grocheio, there were both vocal and instrumental estampies (for which he used the Latin calque \"stantipes\"), which differed somewhat in form, in that the vocal estampie begins with a refrain, which is repeated at the end of each song. Also according to Grocheio, the repeating sections in both the vocal and instrumental estampie were called \"puncta\" (singular \"punctus\") , in the form:\nThe two statements of each punctus differ only in their endings, described as \"apertum\" (\"open\") and \"clausum\" (\"closed\") by Grocheio, who believed that six \"puncta\" were standard for the stantipes (his term for the estampie), though he was aware of stantipes with seven \"puncta\" . The structure can therefore be diagrammed as:\nSometimes the same two endings are used for all the \"puncta\", producing the structure\nA similar structure was shared with the saltarello, another medieval dance.\nThe earliest reported example of this musical form is the song \"Kalenda maya\", written by the troubadour Raimbaut de Vaqueiras (1180\u20131207) to the melody of an estampida played by French jongleurs . \"Two poetry treatises describe the \"estampie\" as a poetic and musical form, and a music treatise provides details about it as both a vocal form and an instrumental dance\" . Fourteenth-century examples include estampies with subtitles such as \"Isabella\" and \"Tre fontane\" . Non-estampie dances found in Br. Lib. Add 29987 include dance pairs such as \"Lamento di Tristano\" and \"La Manfredina\" (each paired with a following \"rotta\"), and Dan\u00e7a amorosa (paired with a following \"troto\") .\nThough the estampie is generally monophonic, there are also two-voice compositions in the form of an estampie, such as the three for keyboard in the Robertsbridge Fragment.\nAccording to Grocheio, the fiddle was the supreme instrument of the period, and the stantipes, together with the cantus coronatus and ductia, were the principal forms played on fiddles before the wealthy in their celebration .\nThe estampie is the first known genre of medieval era dance music which continues to exist today. The estampie can be monophonic (a single musical line) or polyphonic (producing many sounds). The melody is monophonic and is heard as the most prominent melody. However, the melody becomes polyphonic when accompanied by instrumentalists around the one written melody . The estampie was performed in a lively triple meter, a primary division of three beats to the bar. During polyphonic arrangements, the lines do not cross one another. The top line is in the soprano/alto range, using an instrument such as a recorder. The bottom line is in the tenor range using an instrument such as the crumhorn . According to Parisian musical theorist Johannes de Grocheio, when estampies were played as entertainment for the wealthy during their feasts, only the greatest vielle players performed. Grocheio explains the difference between a vocal and instrumental estampie is in the refrain (to repeat). Refrains within the instrumental estampie are the notes that are automatically repeated with each puntum (section). In a vocal estampie, the words carry the refrain and do not repeat, therefore, the last punctum is sung twice . Grocheio has described the differing lengths of puncta as irregular and complicated. He further states that this difficulty captivates the attention of both the players and listeners and diverts the minds of the rich from wicked thoughts . These differences in puncta, i.e. different phrase lengths, lack percussive measure relating to the rhythmic sounds common to all the instruments. The length of percussive measure is equal in a ductia, however is unequal in length in the estampie .\nEtymology.\nAccording to the \"OED\", the name comes from the Proven\u00e7al \"estampida\", feminine of \"estampit\", the past participle of \"estampir\" \"to resound\" ."}
{"id": "10176", "revid": "1783871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10176", "title": "Experimental cancer treatment", "text": "Experimental cancer treatments are non-medical therapies intended to treat cancer by improving on, supplementing or replacing conventional methods (surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and immunotherapy). Experimental cancer treatments cannot make medical claims. The term experimental cancer treatment could thus be substituted for \"non FDA approved cancer treatment.\"\nThe entries listed below vary between theoretical therapies to unproven controversial therapies. Many of these treatments are alleged to help against only specific forms of cancer. It is not a list of treatments widely available at hospitals.\nStudying treatments for cancer.\nThe twin goals of research are to determine whether the treatment actually works (called efficacy) and whether it is sufficiently safe. Regulatory processes attempt to balance the potential benefits with the potential harms, so that people given the treatment are more likely to benefit from it than to be harmed by it.\nMedical research for cancer begins much like research for any disease. In organized studies of new treatments for cancer, the pre-clinical development of drugs, devices, and techniques begins in laboratories, either with isolated cells or in small animals, most commonly rats or mice. In other cases, the proposed treatment for cancer is already in use for some other medical condition, in which case more is known about its safety and potential efficacy.\nClinical Trials are the study of treatments in humans. The first-in-human tests of a potential treatment are called Phase I studies. Early clinical trials typically enroll a very small number of patients, and the purpose is to identify major safety issues and the \"maximum tolerated dose\", which is the highest dose that does not produce serious or fatal adverse effects. The dose given in these trials may be far too small to produce any useful effect. In most research, these early trials may involve healthy people, but cancer studies normally enroll only people with relatively severe forms of the disease in this stage of testing. On average, 95% of the participants in these early trials receive no benefit, but all are exposed to the risk of adverse effects. Most participants show signs of optimism bias (the irrational belief that they will beat the odds).\nLater studies, called Phase II and Phase III studies, enroll more people, and the goal is to determine whether the treatment actually works. Phase III studies are frequently randomized controlled trials, with the experimental treatment being compared to the current best available treatment rather than to a placebo. In some cases, the Phase III trial provides the best available treatment to all participants, in addition to some of the patients receiving the experimental treatment.\nBacterial treatments.\nChemotherapeutic drugs have a hard time penetrating tumors to kill them at their core because these cells may lack a good blood supply . Researchers have been using anaerobic bacteria, such as \"Clostridium novyi\", to consume the interior of oxygen-poor tumours. These should then die when they come in contact with the tumor's oxygenated sides, meaning they would be harmless to the rest of the body. A major problem has been that bacteria do not consume all parts of the malignant tissue. However, combining the therapy with chemotherapeutic treatments can help to solve this problem.\nAnother strategy is to use anaerobic bacteria that have been transformed with an enzyme that can convert a non-toxic prodrug into a toxic drug. With the proliferation of the bacteria in the necrotic and hypoxic areas of the tumor, the enzyme is expressed solely in the tumor. Thus, a systemically applied prodrug is metabolised to the toxic drug only in the tumor. This has been demonstrated to be effective with the nonpathogenic anaerobe \"Clostridium sporogenes\".\nDrug therapies.\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells).\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) is a molecular complex derived from human breast milk that kills tumor cells by a process resembling programmed cell death (apoptosis). It has been tested in humans with skin papillomas and bladder cancer.\nDichloroacetate treatment.\nDichloroacetate (DCA) has been found to shrink tumors \"in vivo\" in rats, and has a plausible scientific mechanism: DCA appears to reactivate suppressed mitochondria in some types of oxygen-starved tumor cells, and thus promotes apoptosis. Because it was tested for other conditions, DCA is known to be relatively safe, available, and inexpensive, and it can be taken by mouth as a pill, which is convenient. Five patients with brain cancer have been treated with DCA in a clinical trial, and the authors say that the lives of four were 'probably' extended. However, without a large controlled trial it is impossible to say whether the drug is truly effective against cancer.\nQuercetin treatment.\nQuercetin is a principal flavonoid compound and an excellent free-radical-scavenging antioxidant that promotes apoptosis. In vitro it shows some antitumor activity in oral cancer and leukemia. Cultured skin and prostate cancer cells showed significant mortality (compared to nonmalignant cells) when treated with a combination of quercetin and ultrasound. Note that ultrasound also promotes topical absorption by up to 1,000 times, making the use of topical quercetin and ultrasound wands an interesting proposition.\nHigh dietary intake of fruits and vegetables is associated with reduction in cancer, and some scientists, such as Gian Luigi Russo at the Institute of Food Sciences in Italy, suspect quercetin may be partly responsible. Research shows that quercetin influences cellular mechanisms in vitro and in animal studies. According to the American Cancer society, \"there is no reliable clinical evidence that quercetin can prevent or treat cancer in humans\".\nInsulin potentiation therapy.\nInsulin potentiation therapy is practice of injecting insulin, usually alongside conventional cancer drugs, in the belief that this improves the overall effect of the treatment. Quackwatch state: \"Insulin Potentiation Therapy (IPT) is one of several unproven, dangerous treatments that is promoted by a small group of practitioners without trustworthy evidence that it works.\"\np53 activation therapy.\nSeveral drug therapies are being developed based on p53, the tumour suppressor gene that protects the cell in response to damage and stress. It is analogous to deciding what to do with a damaged car: p53 brings everything to a halt, and then decides whether to fix the cell or, if the cell is beyond repair, to destroy the cell. This protective function of p53 is disabled in most cancer cells, allowing them to multiply without check. Restoration of p53 activity in tumours (where possible) has been shown to inhibit tumour growth and can even shrink the tumour.\nAs p53 protein levels are usually kept low, one could block its degradation and allow large amounts of p53 to accumulate, thus stimulating p53 activity and its antitumour effects. Drugs that utilize this mechanism include nutlin and MI-219, which are both in phase I clinical trials. There are also other drugs that are still in the preclinical stage of testing, such as RITA and MITA.\nBI811283.\nBI811283 is a small molecule inhibitor of the aurora B kinase protein being developed by Boehringer Ingelheim for use as an anti-cancer agent. BI 811283 is currently in the early stages of clinical development and is undergoing first-in-human trials in patients with solid tumors and Acute Myeloid Leukaemia.\nGene therapy.\nIntroduction of tumor suppressor genes into rapidly dividing cells has been thought to slow down or arrest tumor growth. Adenoviruses are a commonly utilized vector for this purpose. Much research has focused on the use of adenoviruses that cannot reproduce, or reproduce only to a limited extent, within the patient to ensure safety via the avoidance of cytolytic destruction of noncancerous cells infected with the vector. However, new studies focus on adenoviruses that can be permitted to reproduce, and destroy cancerous cells in the process, since the adenoviruses' ability to infect normal cells is substantially impaired, potentially resulting in a far more effective treatment.\nAnother use of gene therapy is the introduction of enzymes into these cells that make them susceptible to particular chemotherapy agents; studies with introducing thymidine kinase in gliomas, making them susceptible to aciclovir, are in their experimental stage.\nEpigenetic options.\nEpigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the DNA sequence, often a result of environmental or dietary damage to the histone receptors within the cell. Current research has shown that epigenetic pharmaceuticals could be a putative replacement or adjuvant therapy for currently accepted treatment methods such as radiation and chemotherapy, or could enhance the effects of these current treatments. It has been shown that the epigenetic control of the proto-onco regions and the tumor suppressor sequences by conformational changes in histones directly affects the formation and progression of cancer. Epigenetics also has the factor of reversibility, a characteristic that other cancer treatments do not offer.\nSome investigators, like Randy Jirtle, PhD, of Duke University Medical Center, think epigenetics may ultimately turn out to have a greater role in disease than genetics.\nTelomerase deactivation therapy.\nBecause most malignant cells rely on the activity of the protein telomerase for their immortality, it has been proposed that a drug that inactivates telomerase might be effective against a broad spectrum of malignancies. At the same time, most healthy tissues in the body express little if any telomerase, and would function normally in its absence. Currently, inositol hexaphosphate, which is available over-the-counter, is undergoing testing in cancer research due to its telomerase-inhibiting abilities.\nA number of research groups have experimented with the use of telomerase inhibitors in animal models, and as of 2005 and 2006 phase I and II human clinical trials are underway. Geron Corporation is currently conducting two clinical trials involving telomerase inhibitors. One uses a vaccine (GRNVAC1) and the other uses a lipidated oligonucleotide (GRN163L).\nRadiation therapies.\nPhotodynamic therapy.\nPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is generally a non-invasive treatment using a combination of light and a photosensitive drug, such as 5-ALA, Foscan, Metvix, padeliporfin (Tookad, WST09, WST11), Photofrin, or Visudyne. The drug is triggered by light of a specific wavelength.\nHyperthermiatic therapy.\nLocalized and whole-body application of heat has been proposed as a technique for the treatment of malignant tumours. Intense heating will cause denaturation and coagulation of cellular proteins, rapidly killing cells within a tumour.\nMore prolonged moderate heating to temperatures just a few degrees above normal (39.5\u00a0\u00b0C) can cause more subtle changes. A mild heat treatment combined with other stresses can cause cell death by apoptosis. There are many biochemical consequences to the heat shock response within the cell, including slowed cell division and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation therapy. The purpose of overheating the tumor cells is to create a lack of oxygen so that the heated cells become overacidified, which leads to a lack of nutrients in the tumor. This in turn disrupts the metabolism of the cells so that cell death (apoptosis) can set in. In certain cases chemotherapy or radiation that has previously not had any effect can be made effective. Hyperthermia alters the cell walls by means of so-called heat shock proteins. The cancer cells then react very much more effectively to the cytostatics and radiation. If hyperthermia is used conscientiously it has no serious side effects.\nThere are many techniques by which heat may be delivered. Some of the most common involve the use of focused ultrasound (FUS or HIFU), microwave heating, induction heating, magnetic hyperthermia, and direct application of heat through the use of heated saline pumped through catheters. Experiments with carbon nanotubes that selectively bind to cancer cells have been performed. Lasers are then used that pass harmlessly through the body, but heat the nanotubes, causing the death of the cancer cells. Similar results have also been achieved with other types of nanoparticles, including gold-coated nanoshells and nanorods that exhibit certain degrees of 'tunability' of the absorption properties of the nanoparticles to the wavelength of light for irradiation. The success of this approach to cancer treatment rests on the existence of an 'optical window' in which biological tissue (i.e., healthy cells) are completely transparent at the wavelength of the laser light, while nanoparticles are highly absorbing at the same wavelength. Such a 'window' exists in the so-called near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this way, the laser light can pass through the system without harming healthy tissue, and only diseased cells, where the nanoparticles reside, get hot and are killed.\nMagnetic Hyperthermia makes use of magnetic nanoparticles, which can be injected into tumours and then generate heat when subjected to an alternating magnetic field.\nOne of the challenges in thermal therapy is delivering the appropriate amount of heat to the correct part of the patient's body. A great deal of current research focuses on precisely positioning heat delivery devices (catheters, microwave, and ultrasound applicators, etc.) using ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging, as well as of developing new types of nanoparticles that make them particularly efficient absorbers while offering little or no concerns about toxicity to the circulation system. Clinicians also hope to use advanced imaging techniques to monitor heat treatments in real time\u2014heat-induced changes in tissue are sometimes perceptible using these imaging instruments. In magnetic hyperthermia or magnetic fluid hyperthermia method, it will be easier to control temperature distribution by controlling the velocity of ferrofluid injection and size of magnetic nanoparticles.\nNoninvasive cancer heat treatment.\nHeat treatment involves using radio waves to heat up tiny metals that are implanted in cancerous tissue. Gold nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes are the most likely candidate. Promising preclinical trials have been conducted, although clinical trials may not be held for another few years.\nAnother method that is entirely non-invasive referred to as Tumor Treating Fields has already reached clinical trial stage in many countries. The concept applies an electric field through a tumour region using electrodes external to the body. Successful trials have shown the process effectiveness to be greater than chemotherapy and there are no side-effects and only negligible time spent away from normal daily activities. This treatment is still in very early development stages for many types of cancer.\nHigh-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is still in investigatory phases in many places around the world. In China it has CFDA approval and over 180 treatment centres have been established in China, Hong Kong, and Korea. HIFU has been successfully used to treat cancer to destroy tumours of the bone, brain, breast, liver, pancreas, rectum, kidney, testes, and prostate. Several thousand patients have been treated with various types of tumours. HIFU has CE approval for palliative care for bone metastasis. Experimentally, palliative care has been provided for cases of advanced pancreatic cancer. High-energy therapeutic ultrasound could increase higher-density anti-cancer drug load and nanomedicines to target tumor sites by 20x fold higher than traditional target cancer therapy.\nCold atmospheric plasma treatment.\nCold atmospheric plasma or CAP for short is an emerging modality for the treatment of solid tumors Recently, cold atmospheric plasma (CAP) indicated promising anti-neoplastic effects on several tumors, e.g. melanoma, glioma, and pancreatic cancer cells [5, 6, 7], and therefore could be an efficient method for anti-cancer treatment in clinical urology in the future. One example of an experimental technology utilizing Cold Atmospheric plasma is Theraphi\nElectromagnetic treatments.\nTumor Treating Fields is a novel FDA-approved cancer treatment therapy that uses alternating electric field to disturb the rapid cell division exhibited by cancer cells.\nComplementary and alternative treatments.\nComplementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments are the diverse group of medical and healthcare systems, practices, and products that are not part of conventional medicine and have not been proven to be effective. \"Complementary medicine\" usually refers to methods and substances used along with conventional medicine, while \"alternative medicine\" refers to compounds used instead of conventional medicine. CAM use is common among people with cancer.\nMost complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been rigorously studied or tested. Some alternative treatments that have been proven ineffective continue to be marketed and promoted."}
{"id": "10178", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10178", "title": "Ethyne", "text": ""}
{"id": "10179", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10179", "title": "Euskara", "text": ""}
{"id": "10181", "revid": "3672900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10181", "title": "Emission", "text": "Emission may refer to:"}
{"id": "10183", "revid": "26021349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10183", "title": "Environmental movement in the United States", "text": "In the United States today, the organized environmental movement is represented by a wide range of organizations sometimes called non-governmental organizations or NGOs. These organizations exist on local, national, and international scales. Environmental NGOs vary widely in political views and in the amount they seek to influence the environmental policy of the United States and other governments. The environmental movement today consists of both large national groups and also many smaller local groups with local concerns. Some resemble the old U.S. conservation movement - whose modern expression is The Nature Conservancy, Audubon Society and National Geographic Society - American organizations with a worldwide influence.\nScope of the movement.\nAs public awareness and the environmental sciences have improved in recent years, environmental issues have broadened to include key concepts such as \"sustainability\" and also new emerging concerns such as ozone depletion, global warming, acid rain, land use and biogenetic pollution.\nEnvironmental movements often interact or are linked with other social movements, e.g. for peace, human rights, and animal rights; and against nuclear weapons and/or nuclear power, endemic diseases, poverty, hunger, etc.\nSome US colleges are now going green by signing the \"President's Climate Commitment,\" a document that a college President can sign to enable said colleges to practice environmentalism by switching to solar power, etc.\nHistory.\nEarly European settlers came to the United States brought from Europe the concept of the commons. In the colonial era, access to natural resources was allocated by individual towns, and disputes over fisheries or land use were resolved at the local level. Changing technologies, however, strained traditional ways of resolving disputes of resource use, and local governments had limited control over powerful special interests. For example, the damming of rivers for mills cut off upriver towns from fisheries; logging and clearing of forest in watersheds harmed local fisheries downstream. In New England, many farmers became uneasy as they noticed clearing of the forest changed stream flows and a decrease in bird population which helped control insects and other pests. These concerns become widely known with the publication of Man and Nature (1864) by George Perkins Marsh. The environmental impact method of analysis is generally the main mode for determining what issues the environmental movement is involved in. This model is used to determine how to proceed in situations that are detrimental to the environment by choosing the way that is least damaging and has the fewest lasting implications.\nConservation movement.\nConservation first became a national issue during the progressive era's conservation movement (1890s - 1920s). The early national conservation movement shifted emphasis to scientific management which favored larger enterprises and control began to shift from local governments to the states and the federal government.(Judd) Some writers credit sportsmen, hunters and fishermen with the increasing influence of the conservation movement. In the 1870s sportsman magazines such as American Sportsmen, Forest and Stream, and Field and Stream are seen as leading to the growth of the conservation movement.(Reiger) This conservation movement also urged the establishment of state and national parks and forests, wildlife refuges, and national monuments intended to preserve noteworthy natural features.\nConservation groups focus primarily on an issue that's origins are rooted in general expansion. As Industrialization became more prominent as well as the increasing trend towards Urbanization the conservative environmental movement began. Contrary to popular belief conservation groups are not against expansion in general, instead, they are concerned with efficiency with resources and land development.\nProgressive era.\nTheodore Roosevelt and his close ally George Bird Grinnell, were motivated by the wanton waste that was taking place at the hand of market hunting. This practice resulted in placing a large number of North American game species on the edge of extinction. Roosevelt recognized that the laissez-faire approach of the U.S. Government was too wasteful and inefficient. In any case, they noted, most of the natural resources in the western states were already owned by the federal government. The best course of action, they argued, was a long-term plan devised by national experts to maximize the long-term economic benefits of natural resources. To accomplish the mission, Roosevelt and Grinnell formed the Boone and Crockett Club in 1887. The club was made up of the best minds and influential men of the day. The Boone and Crockett Club's contingency of conservationists, scientists, politicians, and intellectuals became Roosevelt's closest advisers during his march to preserve wildlife and habitat across North America. As president, Theodore Roosevelt became a prominent conservationist, putting the issue high on the national agenda. He worked with all the major figures of the movement, especially his chief advisor on the matter, Gifford Pinchot. Roosevelt was deeply committed to conserving natural resources and is considered to be the nation's first conservation President. He encouraged the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 to promote federal construction of dams to irrigate small farms and placed under federal protection. Roosevelt set aside more Federal land for national parks and nature preserves than all of his predecessors combined.\nRoosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 Bird Reserves, four Game Preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nation's first. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately .\nGifford Pinchot had been appointed by McKinley as chief of Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture. In 1905, his department gained control of the national forest reserves. Pinchot promoted private use (for a fee) under federal supervision. In 1907, Roosevelt designated of new national forests just minutes before a deadline.\nIn May 1908, Roosevelt sponsored the Conference of Governors held in the White House, with a focus on natural resources and their most efficient use. Roosevelt delivered the opening address: \"Conservation as a National Duty.\"\nIn 1903 Roosevelt toured the Yosemite Valley with John Muir, who had a very different view of conservation and tried to minimize commercial use of water resources and forests. Working through the Sierra Club he founded, Muir succeeded in 1905 in having Congress transfer the Mariposa Grove and Yosemite Valley to the National Park Service. While Muir wanted nature preserved for the sake of pure beauty, Roosevelt subscribed to Pinchot's formulation, \"to make the forest produce the largest amount of whatever crop or service will be most useful, and keep on producing it for generation after generation of men and trees.\" Muir and the Sierra Club vehemently opposed the damming of the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite in order to provide water to the city of San Francisco. Roosevelt and Pinchot supported the dam, as did President Woodrow Wilson. The Hetch Hetchy dam was finished in 1923 and is still in operation, but the Sierra Club still wants to tear it down.\nOther influential conservationists of the Progressive Era included George Bird Grinnell (a prominent sportsman who founded the Boone and Crockett Club), the Izaak Walton League and John Muir, the founder of the Sierra Club in 1892. Conservationists organized the National Parks Conservation Association, the Audubon Society, and other groups that still remain active.\nNew Deal.\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt (1933\u201345), like his cousin Theodore Roosevelt, was an ardent conservationist. He used numerous programs of the departments of Agriculture and Interior to end wasteful land-use, mitigate the effects of the Dust Bowl, and efficiently develop natural resources in the West. One of the most popular of all New Deal programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps (1933\u20131943), which sent two million poor young men to work in rural and wilderness areas, primarily on conservation projects.\nPost-1945.\nAfter World War II increasing encroachment on wilderness land evoked the continued resistance of conservationists, who succeeded in blocking a number of projects in the 1950s and 1960s, including the proposed Bridge Canyon Dam that would have backed up the waters of the Colorado River into the Grand Canyon National Park.\nThe Inter-American Conference on the Conservation of Renewable Natural Resources met in 1948 as a collection of nearly 200 scientists from all over the Americans forming the trusteeship principle that:\n\"No generation can exclusively own the renewable resources by which it lives. We hold the commonwealth in trust for prosperity, and to lessen or destroy it is to commit treason against the future\"\nBeginning of the modern movement.\nDuring the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, several events occurred which raised the public awareness of harm to the environment caused by man. In 1954, the 23 man crew of the Japanese fishing vessel \"Lucky Dragon\" was exposed to radioactive fallout from a hydrogen bomb test at Bikini Atoll. By 1969, the public reaction to an ecologically catastrophic oil spill from an offshore well in California's Santa Barbara Channel, Barry Commoner's protest against nuclear testing, along with Rachel Carson's 1962 book \"Silent Spring\", and Paul R. Ehrlich's \"The Population Bomb\" (1968) all added anxiety about the environment. Pictures of Earth from space emphasized that the earth was small and fragile.\nAs the public became more aware of environmental issues, concern about air pollution, water pollution, solid waste disposal, dwindling energy resources, radiation, pesticide poisoning (particularly as described in Carson's influential \"Silent Spring\"), noise pollution, and other environmental problems engaged a broadening number of sympathizers. That public support for environmental concerns was widespread became clear in the Earth Day demonstrations of 1970.\nWilderness preservation.\nIn the modern wilderness preservation movement, important philosophical roles are played by the writings of John Muir who had been activist in the late 19th and early 20th century. Along with Muir perhaps most influential in the modern movement is Henry David Thoreau who published Walden in 1854. Also important was forester and ecologist Aldo Leopold, one of the founders of the Wilderness Society in 1935, who wrote a classic of nature observation and ethical philosophy, \"A Sand County Almanac\", published in 1949. Other philosophical foundations were established by Ralph Waldo Emerson and Thomas Jefferson.\nThere is also a growing movement of campers and other people who enjoy outdoor recreation activities to help preserve the environment while spending time in the wilderness.\nAnti-nuclear movement.\nThe anti-nuclear movement in the United States consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups that have acted to oppose nuclear power or nuclear weapons, or both, in the United States. These groups include the Abalone Alliance, Clamshell Alliance, Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Nuclear Information and Resource Service, and Physicians for Social Responsibility. The anti-nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some new nuclear plants, and has pressured the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants.\nAnti-nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the environmental movement. Campaigns which captured national public attention involved the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Seabrook Station Nuclear Power Plant, Diablo Canyon Power Plant, Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, and Three Mile Island. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983 at 50 sites across the United States.\nThere were many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s.\nMore recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant, Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station, Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, proposed Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los Alamos National Laboratory.\nSome scientists and engineers have expressed reservations about nuclear power, including: Barry Commoner, S. David Freeman, John Gofman, Arnold Gundersen, Mark Z. Jacobson, Amory Lovins, Arjun Makhijani, Gregory Minor, Joseph Romm and Benjamin K. Sovacool. Scientists who have opposed nuclear weapons include Linus Pauling and Eugene Rabinowitch.\nAntitoxics groups.\nAntitoxics groups are a subgroup that is affiliated with the Environmental Movement in the United States, that is primarily concerned with the effects that cities and their by-products have on humans. This aspect of the movement is a self-proclaimed \"movement of housewives\". Concern around the issues of groundwater contamination and air pollution rose in the early 1980s and individuals involved in antitoxics groups claim that they are concerned for the health of their families.\nA prominent case can be seen in the Love Canal Homeowner's association (LCHA); in this case, a housing development was built on a site that had been used for toxic dumping by the Hooker Chemical Company. As a result of this dumping, the residents had symptoms of skin irritation, Lois Gibbs, a resident of the development, started a grassroots campaign for reparations. Eventual success led to the government having to purchase homes that were sold in the development.\nFederal legislation in the 1970s.\nPrior to the 1970s the protection of basic air and water supplies was a matter mainly left to each state. During the 1970s, the primary responsibility for clean air and water shifted to the federal government. Growing concerns, both environmental and economic, from cities and towns as well as sportsman and other local groups, and senators such as Maine's Edmund S. Muskie, led to the passage of extensive legislation, notably the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. Other legislation included the 1970 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which established the Council on Environmental Quality; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1977, which became known as the Clean Water Act, and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as the Superfund Act (1980). These laws regulated public drinking water systems, toxic substances, pesticides, and ocean dumping; and protected wildlife, wilderness, and wild and scenic rivers. Moreover, the new laws provide for pollution research, standard setting, contaminated site cleanup, monitoring, and enforcement.\nThe creation of these laws led to a major shift in the environmental movement. Groups such as the Sierra Club shifted focus from local issues to becoming a lobby in Washington and new groups, for example, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Environmental Defense, arose to influence politics as well. (Larson)\nRenewed focus on local action.\nIn the 1980s, President Ronald Reagan sought to curtail the scope of environmental protection taking steps such as appointing James G. Watt who was called one of the most \"blatantly anti-environmental political appointees\". The major environmental groups responded with mass mailings which led to increased membership and donations. The large environmental organization increasingly relied on ties within Washington, D.C. to advance their environmental agenda. At the same time membership in environmental groups became more suburban and urban. Groups such as animal rights and the gun control lobby became linked with environmentalism while sportsmen, farmers and ranchers were no longer influential in the movement.\nWhen industry groups lobbied to weaken regulation and a backlash against environmental regulations, the so-called wise use movement gained importance and influence. The wise use movement and anti-environmental groups were able to portray environmentalist as out of touch with mainstream values. (Larson)\n\"Post-environmentalism\".\nIn 2004, with the environmental movement seemingly stalled, some environmentalists started questioning whether \"environmentalism\" was even a useful political framework. According to a controversial essay titled \"The Death of Environmentalism \" (Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, 2004) American environmentalism has been remarkably successful in protecting the air, water, and large stretches of wilderness in North America and Europe, but these environmentalists have stagnated as a vital force for cultural and political change.\nShellenberger and Nordhaus wrote, \"Today environmentalism is just another special interest. Evidence for this can be found in its concepts, its proposals, and its reasoning. What stands out is how arbitrary environmental leaders are about what gets counted and what doesn't as 'environmental.' Most of the movement's leading thinkers, funders, and advocates do not question their most basic assumptions about who we are, what we stand for, and what it is that we should be doing.\" Their essay was followed by a speech in San Francisco called \"Is Environmentalism Dead?\" by former Sierra Club President, Adam Werbach, who argued for the evolution of environmentalism into a more expansive, relevant and powerful progressive politics. Werbach endorsed building an environmental movement that is more relevant to average Americans and controversially chose to lead Wal-Mart's effort to take sustainability mainstream.\nThese \"post-environmental movement\" thinkers argue that the ecological crises the human species faces in the 21st century are qualitatively different from the problems the environmental movement was created to address in the 1960s and 1970s. They argue that climate change and habitat destruction are global and more complex, therefore demanding far deeper transformations of the economy, the culture and political life. The consequence of environmentalism's outdated and arbitrary definition, they argue, is a political irrelevancy.\nThese \"politically neutral\" groups tend to avoid global conflicts and view the settlement of inter-human conflict as separate from regard for nature \u2013 in direct contradiction to the ecology movement and peace movement which have increasingly close links: while Green Parties, Greenpeace, and groups like the ACTivist Magazine regard ecology, biodiversity, and an end to non-human extinction as an absolute basis for peace, the local groups may not, and see a high degree of global competition and conflict as justifiable if it lets them preserve their own local uniqueness. However, such groups tend not to \"burn out\" and to sustain for long periods, even generations, protecting the same local treasures.\nLocal groups increasingly find that they benefit from collaboration, e.g. on consensus decision-making methods, or making simultaneous policy, or relying on common legal resources, or even sometimes a common glossary. However, the differences between the various groups that make up the modern environmental movement tend to outweigh such similarities, and they rarely co-operate directly except on a few major global questions. In a notable exception, over 1,000 local groups from around the country united for a single day of action as part of the Step It Up 2007 campaign for real solutions to global warming.\nGroups such as The Bioregional Revolution are calling on the need to bridge these differences, as the converging problems of the 21st century they claim compel the people to unite and to take decisive action. They promote bioregionalism, permaculture, and local economies as solutions to these problems, overpopulation, global warming, global epidemics, and water scarcity, but most notably to \"peak oil\" \u2013 the prediction that the country is likely to reach a maximum in global oil production which could spell drastic changes in many aspects of the residents' everyday lives.\nEnvironmental rights.\nMany environmental lawsuits turn on the question of who has standing; are the legal issues limited to property owners, or does the general public have a right to intervene? Christopher D. Stone's 1972 essay, \"Should trees have standing?\" seriously addressed the question of whether natural objects themselves should have legal rights, including the right to participate in lawsuits. Stone suggested that there was nothing absurd in this view, and noted that many entities now regarded as having legal rights were, in the past, regarded as \"things\" that were regarded as legally rightless; for example, aliens, children and women. His essay is sometimes regarded as an example of the fallacy of hypostatization.\nOne of the earliest lawsuits to establish that citizens may sue for environmental and aesthetic harms was Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, decided in 1965 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The case helped halt the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York State. See also United States environmental law and David Sive, an attorney who was involved in the case.\nRole of science.\nConservation biology is an important and rapidly developing field.\nOne way to avoid the stigma of an \"ism\" was to evolve early anti-nuclear groups into the more scientific Green Parties, sprout new NGOs such as Greenpeace and Earth Action, and devoted groups to protecting global biodiversity and preventing global warming and climate change. But in the process, much of the emotional appeal, and many of the original aesthetic goals were lost. Nonetheless, these groups have well-defined ethical and political views, backed by science.\nCriticisms.\nSome people are skeptical of the environmental movement and feel that it is more deeply rooted in politics than science. Although there have been serious debates about climate change and effects of some pesticides and herbicides that mimic animal sex steroids, science has shown that some of the claims of environmentalists have credence.\nClaims made by environmentalists may be perceived as veiled attacks on industry and globalization rather than legitimate environmental concerns. Detractors note that a significant number of environmental theories and predictions have been inaccurate and suggest that the regulations recommended by environmentalists will more likely harm society rather than help nature.\nDDT.\nRachel Carson, in her book \"Silent Spring\", suggested that the pesticide DDT caused cancer and drastically harmed ecosystems. DDT is highly toxic to aquatic life, including crawfish, daphnids, sea shrimp and many species of fish. However, DDT is also used to control malaria.\nNovelist and Harvard Medical School graduate Michael Crichton appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works on September 28, 2005, to address such concerns and recommended the employment of double-blind experimentation in environmental research. Crichton suggested that because environmental issues are so political in nature, policymakers need neutral, conclusive data to base their decisions on, rather than conjecture and rhetoric, and double-blind experiments are the most efficient way to achieve that aim.\nA consistent theme acknowledged by both supporters and critics (though more commonly vocalized by critics) of the environmental movement is that we know very little about the Earth we live in. Most fields of environmental studies are relatively new, and therefore what research we have is limited and does not date far enough back for us to completely understand long-term environmental trends. This has led a number of environmentalists to support the use of the precautionary principle in policy-making, which ultimately asserts that we don't know how certain actions may affect the environment and because there is reason to believe they may cause more harm than good we should refrain from such actions.\nElitist.\nIn the December 1994 \"Wild Forest Review,\" Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair wrote \"The mainstream environmental movement was elitist, highly paid, detached from the people, indifferent to the working class, and a firm ally of big government.\u2026The environmental movement is now accurately perceived as just another well-financed and cynical special interest group, its rancid infrastructure supported by Democratic Party operatives and millions in grants from corporate foundations.\"\nWilderness myth.\nHistorian and President of the American Historical Association William Cronon has criticized the modern environmental movement for having romantic idealizations of wilderness. Cronon writes \"wilderness serves as the unexamined foundation on which so many of the quasi-religious values of modern environmentalism rest.\" Cronon claims that \"to the extent that we live in an urban-industrial civilization but at the same time pretend to ourselves that our real home is in the wilderness, to just that extent we give ourselves permission to evade responsibility for the lives we actually lead.\"\nSimilarly Michael Pollan has argued that the wilderness ethic leads people to dismiss areas whose wildness is less than absolute. In his book Second Nature, Pollan writes that \"once a landscape is no longer 'virgin' it is typically written off as fallen, lost to nature, irredeemable.\"\nDebates within the movement.\nWithin the environmental movement, an ideological debate has taken place between those with an ecocentric viewpoint and an anthropocentric viewpoint. The anthropocentric view has been seen as the conservationist approach to the environment with nature viewed, at least in part, as a resource to be used by man. In contrast to the conservationist approach the ecocentric view, associated with John Muir, Henry David Thoreau and William Wordsworth referred to as the preservationist movement. This approach sees nature in a more spiritual way. Many environmental historians consider the split between John Muir and Gifford Pinchot. During the preservation/conservation debate, the term preservationist becomes to be seen as a pejorative term.\nWhile the ecocentric view focused on biodiversity and wilderness protection the anthropocentric view focuses on urban pollution and social justice. Some environmental writers, for example, William Cronon have criticized the ecocentric view as have a dualist view as a man being separate from nature. Critics of the anthropocentric viewpoint contend that the environmental movement has been taken over by so-called leftist with an agenda beyond environmental protection.\nSeveral books after the middle of the 20th century contributed to the rise of American environmentalism (as distinct from the longer-established conservation movement), especially among college and university students and the more literate public. One was the publication of the first textbook on ecology, \"Fundamentals of Ecology,\" by Eugene Odum and Howard Odum, in 1953. Another was the appearance of the Carson's 1962 best-seller \"Silent Spring.\" Her book brought about a whole new interpretation of pesticides by exposing their harmful effects in nature. From this book, many began referring to Carson as the \"mother of the environmental movement\". Another influential development was a 1965 lawsuit, \"Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission,\" opposing the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York (state), which is said to have given birth to modern United States environmental law. The wide popularity of \"The Whole Earth Catalogs\", starting in 1968, was quite influential among the younger, hands-on, activist generation of the 1960s and 1970s. Recently, in addition to opposing environmental degradation and protecting wilderness, an increased focus on coexisting with natural biodiversity has appeared, a strain that is apparent in the movement for sustainable agriculture and in the concept of Reconciliation Ecology.\nEnvironmentalism and politics.\nEnvironmentalists became much more influential in American politics after the creation or strengthening of numerous US environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act and the formation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. These successes were followed by the enactment of a whole series of laws regulating waste (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act), toxic substances (Toxic Substances Control Act), pesticides (FIFRA: Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act), clean-up of polluted sites (Superfund), protection of endangered species (Endangered Species Act), and more.\nFewer environmental laws have been passed in the last decade as corporations and other conservative interests have increased their influence over American politics. Corporate cooperation against environmental lobbyists has been organized by the Wise Use group. At the same time, many environmentalists have been turning toward other means of persuasion, such as working with business, community, and other partners to promote sustainable development. Since the 1970s, coalitions and interests groups have directed themselves along the democrat and republican party lines.&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMuch environmental activism is directed towards conservation as well as the prevention or elimination of pollution. However, conservation movements, ecology movements, peace movements, green parties, green- and eco-anarchists often subscribe to very different ideologies, while supporting the same goals as those who call themselves \"environmentalists\". To outsiders, these groups or factions can appear to be indistinguishable.\nAs human population and industrial activity continue to increase, environmentalists often find themselves in serious conflict with those who believe that human and industrial activities should not be overly regulated or restricted, such as some libertarians.\nEnvironmentalists often clash with others, particularly \"corporate interests,\" over issues of the management of natural resources, like in the case of the atmosphere as a \"carbon dump\", the focus of climate change, and global warming controversy. They usually seek to protect commonly owned or unowned resources for future generations.\nRadical environmentalism.\nWhile most environmentalists are mainstream and peaceful, a small minority are more radical in their approach. Adherents of radical environmentalism and ecological anarchism are involved in direct action campaigns to protect the environment. Some campaigns have employed controversial tactics including sabotage, blockades, and arson, while most use peaceful protests such as marches, tree-sitting, and the like. There is substantial debate within the environmental movement as to the acceptability of these tactics, but almost all environmentalists condemn violent actions that can harm humans."}
{"id": "10184", "revid": "1012466588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10184", "title": "Environmentalist", "text": "An environmentalist is a person who is concerned with and/or advocates for the protection of the environment. An environmentalist can be considered a supporter of the goals of the environmental movement, \"a political and ethical movement that seeks to improve and protect the quality of the natural environment through changes to environmentally harmful human activities\". An environmentalist is engaged in or believes in the philosophy of environmentalism.\nEnvironmentalists are sometimes referred to using informal or derogatory terms such as \"greenie\" and \"tree-hugger\".\nImpact: The environmentalist movement has made America today a more ecologically friendly place than in the 1960s and 1970s when the movement started (Goldstein 2002).\nNotable environmentalists.\nSome of the notable environmentalists who have been active in lobbying for environmental protection and conservation include:\nExtension.\nIn recent years, there are not only environmentalist for natural environment but also environmentalist for human environment. For instance, the activists who call for \"mental green space\" by getting rid of disadvantages of internet, cable TV, and smartphones have been called \"info-environmentalists\"."}
{"id": "10185", "revid": "847635479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10185", "title": "Environmentalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "10186", "revid": "1012954186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10186", "title": "Eastern Orthodox Church", "text": "The Eastern Orthodox Church, officially the Orthodox Catholic Church, is the second-largest Christian church, with approximately 220 million baptised members. It operates as a communion of autocephalous churches, each governed by its bishops in local synods. Roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in the territory of the former Soviet Union, most of those living in Russia. The church has no central doctrinal or governmental authority analogous to the bishop of Rome (Roman Catholic Pope), but the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by all as \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") of the bishops. As one of the oldest surviving religious institutions in the world, the Eastern Orthodox Church has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, and the Near East.\nEastern Orthodox theology is based on holy tradition which incorporates the dogmatic decrees of the seven Ecumenical Councils, the Scriptures, and the teaching of the Church Fathers. The church teaches that it is the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles. It maintains that it practises the original Christian faith, as passed down by holy tradition. Its patriarchates, reminiscent of the pentarchy, and other autocephalous and autonomous churches reflect a variety of hierarchical organisation. It recognises seven major sacraments, of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest, the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the God-bearer, honoured in devotions.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church shared communion with the Roman Catholic Church in the state church of Rome until the East\u2013West Schism in 1054, disputing particularly the authority of the pope. Before the Council of Ephesus in AD 431 the Church of the East also shared in this communion, as did the Oriental Orthodox Churches before the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, all separating primarily over differences in Christology.\nThe majority of Eastern Orthodox Christians live mainly in Southeast and Eastern Europe, Cyprus, Georgia and other communities in the Caucasus region, and communities in Siberia reaching the Russian Far East. There are also smaller communities in the former Byzantine regions of Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean, and in the Middle East, where it is decreasing due to forced migration because of increased religious persecution in recent years. There are also many in other parts of the world, formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.\nName and characteristics.\nIn keeping with the church's teaching on universality and with the Nicene Creed, Orthodox authorities such as Saint Raphael of Brooklyn have insisted that the full name of the church has always included the term \"Catholic\", as in \"Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Church\". The official name of the Eastern Orthodox Church is the \"Orthodox Catholic Church\". It is the name by which the church refers to itself in its liturgical or canonical texts, in official publications, and in official contexts or administrative documents. Orthodox teachers refer to the church as Catholic. This name and longer variants containing \"Catholic\" are also recognised and referenced in other books and publications by secular or non-Orthodox writers.\nThe common name of the church, \"Eastern Orthodox Church\", is a shortened practicality that helps to avoid confusions in casual use. From ancient times through the first millennium, Greek was the most prevalent shared language in the demographic regions where the Byzantine Empire flourished, and Greek, being the language in which the New Testament was written, was the primary liturgical language of the church. For this reason, the eastern churches were sometimes identified as \"Greek\" (in contrast to the \"Roman\" or \"Latin\" church, which used a Latin translation of the Bible), even before the Great Schism of 1054. After 1054, \"Greek Orthodox\" or \"Greek Catholic\" marked a church as being in communion with Constantinople, much as \"Catholic\" did for communion with Rome. This identification with Greek, however, became increasingly confusing with time. Missionaries brought Orthodoxy to many regions without ethnic Greeks, where the Greek language was not spoken. In addition, struggles between Rome and Constantinople to control parts of Southeastern Europe resulted in the conversion of some churches to Rome, which then also used \"Greek Catholic\" to indicate their continued use of the Byzantine rites. Today, many of those same churches remain, while a very large number of Orthodox are not of Greek national origin, and do not use Greek as the language of worship. \"Eastern\", then, indicates the geographical element in the Church's origin and development, while \"Orthodox\" indicates the faith, as well as communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. There are additional Christian churches in the east that are in communion with neither Rome nor Constantinople, who tend to be distinguished by the category named \"Oriental Orthodox\". While the church continues officially to call itself \"Catholic\", for reasons of universality, the common title of \"Eastern Orthodox Church\" avoids casual confusion with the Roman Catholic Church.\nOrthodoxy.\nThe first known use of the phrase \"the catholic Church\" (\"he katholike ekklesia\") occurred in a letter written about 110 AD from one Greek church to another (Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans). The letter states: \"Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church.\" Thus, almost from the beginning, Christians referred to the Church as the \"one, holy, catholic (from the Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae, \"according to the whole, universal\") and apostolic Church\". The Eastern Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same early church.\nA number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Assyrian Church and the Oriental Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox view, the Assyrians and Orientals left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East\u2013West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break. The Church of England separated from the Catholic Church, not directly from the Eastern Orthodox Church, for the first time in the 1530s (and, after a brief reunion in 1555, again finally in 1558). Thus, though it was united to Orthodoxy when established through the work of Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the early 7th century, its separation from Orthodoxy came about indirectly through the See of Rome.\nTo all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient Church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Eastern Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word \"Orthodox\" itself, a union of Greek \"orthos\" (\"straight\", \"correct\", \"true\", \"right\") and \"doxa\" (\"common belief\", from the ancient verb \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u03ad\u03c9-\u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u1ff6 which is translated \"to believe\", \"to think\", \"to consider\", \"to imagine\", \"to assume\").\nThe dual meanings of \"doxa\", with \"glory\" or \"glorification\" (of God by the Church and of the Church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair \"correct belief\" and \"true worship\". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the church together with Christ. The Bulgarian and all the Slavic churches use the title \"Pravoslavie\" (Cyrillic: \u041f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\u0441\u043b\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0435), meaning \"correctness of glorification\", to denote what is in English \"Orthodoxy\", while the Georgians use the title \"Martlmadidebeli\". Several other churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa also came to use \"Orthodox\" in their titles, but are still distinct from the Eastern Orthodox Church as described in this article.\nThe term \"Eastern Church\" (the geographic east in the East\u2013West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). \"Eastern\" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Eastern Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title \"Eastern Orthodox\", \"Orthodox Catholic\", or simply \"Orthodox\".\nWhat unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through holy tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in scripture and worship, and the latter most essentially through baptism and in the Divine Liturgy. Orthodox Christians proclaim the faith lives and breathes by God's energies in communion with the church. Inter-communion is the litmus test by which all can see that two churches share the same faith; lack of inter-communion (excommunication, literally \"out of communion\") is the sign of different faiths, even though some central theological points may be shared. The sharing of beliefs can be highly significant, but it is not the full measure of the faith according to the Orthodox.\nThe lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Eastern Orthodox Church has spread into the west and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance. And as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of persecutions of Christians in communist nations has left behind both some governance and some faith issues that have yet to be completely resolved.\nAll members of the Eastern Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves. It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The church proclaims the Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of holy tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the church, as given in the scriptural promises.\nThe shared beliefs of Orthodoxy, and its theology, exist within holy tradition and cannot be separated from it, for their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone. Doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed. Doctrine must also be lived in order to be prayed, for without action, the prayer is idle and empty, a mere vanity, and therefore the theology of demons. According to these teachings of the ancient Church, no superficial belief can ever be orthodox. Similarly, reconciliation and unity are not superficial, but are prayed and lived out.\nCatholicity.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic. The doctrine of the Catholicity of the Church, as derived from the Nicene Creed, is essential to Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology. The term \"Catholicity of the Church\" (Greek ) is used in its original sense, as a designation for the Universality of the Church, centered around Christ. Therefore, the Eastern Orthodox notion of catholicity is not centered around any singular see, unlike the Catholic Church which has one earthly center.\nDue to the influence of the Catholic Church in the west, where the English language itself developed, the words \"catholic\" and \"catholicity\" are sometimes used to refer to that church specifically. However, the more prominent dictionary sense given for general use is still the one shared by other languages, implying breadth and universality, reflecting comprehensive scope. In a Christian context, the Christian Church, as identified with the original Church founded by Christ and his apostles, is said to be catholic (or universal) in regard to its union with Christ in faith. Just as Christ is indivisible, so are union with him and faith in him, whereby the Church is \"universal\", unseparated, and comprehensive, including all who share that faith. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware has called that \"simple Christianity\". That is the sense of early and patristic usage wherein the church usually refers to itself as the \"Catholic Church\", whose faith is the \"Orthodox faith\". It is also the sense within the phrase \"one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church\", found in the Nicene Creed, and referred to in Orthodox worship, e.g. in the litany of the catechumens in the Divine Liturgy.\nWith the mutual excommunications of the East\u2013West Schism in 1054, the churches in Rome and Constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true Church, leaving a smaller but still-catholic church in place. Each retained the \"Catholic\" part of its title, the \"\"Roman\" Catholic Church\" (or Catholic Church) on the one hand, and the \"\"Orthodox\" Catholic Church\" on the other, each of which was defined in terms of inter-communion with either Rome or Constantinople. While the Eastern Orthodox Church recognises what it shares in common with other churches, including the Catholic Church, it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith, with the Church throughout all time, and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully.\nOrganisation and leadership.\nThe religious authority for Eastern Orthodoxy is not a patriarch or the bishop of Rome as in Catholicism, nor the Bible as in Protestantism, but the scriptures as interpreted by the seven ecumenical councils of the Imperial Roman Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church is a fellowship of \"autocephalous\" (Greek for self-headed) churches, with the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople being the only autocephalous head who holds the title \"primus inter pares\", meaning \"first among equals\" in Latin. The Patriarch of Constantinople has the honor of primacy, but his title is only first among equals and has no real authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan and set out prerogatives interpreted by the ecumenical patriarch, though at times the office of the ecumenical patriarch has been accused of Constantinopolitan or Eastern papism. The Eastern Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the church and the church to be his body. It is believed that authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and clergy through the laying on of hands\u2014a practice started by the apostles, and that this unbroken historical and physical link is an essential element of the true Church (Acts 8:17, 1 Tim 4:14, Heb 6:2). The Orthodox Church asserts that apostolic succession requires apostolic faith, and bishops without apostolic faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to apostolic succession.\nThe Eastern Orthodox communion is organised into several regional churches, which are either autocephalous (\"self-headed\") or lower-ranking autonomous (the Greek term for \"self-governing\") church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and the Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016, the Orthodox Church in America formed in 1970, the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine created in 2019, as well as a number of autonomous churches. Each church has a ruling bishop and a holy synod to administer its jurisdiction and to lead the Orthodox Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.\nEach bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs. His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Orthodox Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organised into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice a year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.\nChurch councils.\nThere have been a number of times when alternative theological ideas arose to challenge the Orthodox faith. At such times the Orthodox communion deemed it necessary to convene a general or \"great\" council of all available bishops throughout the world. The Orthodox Church holds that seven ecumenical councils, held between the 4th and the 8th centuries, are authoritative.\nThe ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, deacons, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these great synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Great Christian Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Church. The Pope of Rome at that time held the position of \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") and, while he was not present at any of the councils, he continued to hold this title until the East\u2013West Schism of 1054.\nOther councils have helped to define the Eastern Orthodox position, specifically the Quinisext Council, the Synods of Constantinople, 879\u2013880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i, 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672; the Pan-Orthodox Council, held in Greece in 2016, was the only such Eastern Orthodox council in modern times.\nAccording to Orthodox teaching the position of \"first among equals\" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organisational head of a council of equals (like a president). His words and opinions carry no more insight or wisdom than any other bishop. It is believed that the Holy Spirit guides the Eastern Orthodox Church through the decisions of the entire council, not one individual. Additionally it is understood that even the council's decisions must be accepted by the entire Orthodox Church in order for them to be valid.\nOne of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honor to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the \"New Rome\". According to the third canon of the second ecumenical council: \"Because [Constantinople] is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor after the bishop of Rome.\" This means that both enjoy the same privileges because they are both bishops of the imperial capitals, but the bishop of Rome will precede the bishop of Constantinople since Old Rome precedes New Rome.\nThe 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: \"For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is.\"\nBecause of the schism the Eastern Orthodox no longer recognise the primacy of the Pope of Rome. The Patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of \"first among equals\".\nAdherents.\nPolitics, wars, persecutions, oppressions, and related potential threats can make precise counts of Orthodox membership difficult to obtain at best in some regions. Historically, forced migrations have also altered demographics in relatively short periods of time. The most reliable estimates currently available number Orthodox adherents at around 220 million worldwide, making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after the Catholic Church. The numerous Protestant groups in the world, if taken all together, substantially outnumber the Eastern Orthodox, but they differ theologically and do not form a single communion. According to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, the Eastern Orthodox population in 2010 decreased to 4% of the global population from 7.1% of the global population in 1910. According to the same source, in terms of the total Christian population, the relative percentages were 12.2% and 20.4% respectively.\nMost members today are concentrated in Southern Europe, Eastern Europe and Asian Russia, in addition to significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant, although Eastern Orthodoxy has spread into a global religion towards Western Europe and the New World, with churches in most countries and major cities. The adherents constitute the largest single religious faith in the world's largest country\u2014Russia, where roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live. They are the majority religion in Ukraine, Romania, Belarus, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Moldova, Georgia, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro; they also dominate in the disputed territories of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant minorities of Eastern Orthodox are present in Bosnia and Herzegovina (absolute majority in Republika Srpska), Latvia, Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Albania, Syria, and many other countries.\nThe percentage of Christians in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2.5 percent in 1927, predominantly due to persecution, including the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide, the Assyrian genocide and subsequent population exchange between Greece and Turkey, population exchanges between Bulgaria and Turkey, and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas). Today there are more than 160,000 people (about 0.2%) of different Christian denominations.\nThrough mostly labor migration from Eastern Europe and some conversion, Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religious grouping in certain Western countries, for example in the Republic of Ireland, but Orthodoxy is not \"a central marker of minority identity\" for the migrants. In the United States, the number of Orthodox parishes is growing.\nTheology.\nTrinity.\nOrthodox Christians believe in the Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (\"hypostases\"), without overlap or modality among them, who each have one divine essence (\"ousia\" Greek \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1)\u2014uncreated, immaterial and eternal. These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Trinity is summarised in the Nicene Creed.\nIn discussing God's relationship to his creation, Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and his \"uncreated energies\", which is how he reaches humanity. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches mankind are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from God's inner being.\nIn understanding the Trinity as \"one God in three persons\", \"three persons\" is not to be emphasised more than \"one God\", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: \"Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified.\" Their \"communion of essence\" is \"indivisible\". Trinitarian terminology\u2014essence, hypostasis, etc.\u2014are used \"philosophically\", \"to answer the ideas of the heretics\", and \"to place the terms where they separate error and truth.\" The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness is believed to remain beyond man's comprehension and expression, a holy mystery that can only be experienced.\nSin, salvation, and the incarnation.\nAccording to the Eastern Orthodox faith, at some point in the beginnings of human existence, humanity was faced with a choice: to learn the difference between good and evil through observation or through participation. The biblical story of Adam and Eve relates this choice by mankind to participate in evil, accomplished through disobedience to God's command. Both the intent and the action were separate from God's will; it is that separation that defines and marks any operation as sin. The separation from God caused the loss of (fall from) his grace, a severing of mankind from his creator and the source of his life. The end result was the diminishment of human nature and its subjection to death and corruption, an event commonly referred to as the \"fall of man\".\nWhen Orthodox Christians refer to fallen nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; humans are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil, but fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said among Orthodox that humans are \"inclined to sin\"; that is, people find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors. But just as any species begets its own kind, so fallen humans beget fallen humans, and from the beginning of humanity's existence people lie open to sinning by their own choice.\nSince the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades and of death itself. Through God's participation in humanity, Christ's human nature, perfected and unified with his divine nature, ascended into heaven, there to reign in communion with the Father and Holy Spirit.\nBy these acts of salvation, Christ provided fallen mankind with the path to escape its fallen nature. The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that through baptism into Christ's death, and a person's death unto sin in repentance, with God's help mankind can also rise with Christ into heaven, healed of the breach of man's fallen nature and restored to God's grace. To Orthodox Christians, this process is what is meant by \"salvation,\" which consists of the Christian life. The ultimate goal is theosis an even closer union with God and closer likeness to God than existed in the Garden of Eden. This process is called Deification or \"God became man that man might become 'god'\". However, it must be emphasised that Orthodox Christians do not believe that man becomes God in his essence, or a god in his own nature. More accurately, Christ's salvific work enables man in his human nature to become \"partakers of the Divine nature\" (2 Peter 1:4); that is to say, man is united to God in Christ.\nThrough Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time\u2014saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the Church as saints.\nThe Eastern Orthodox reject the idea that Christ died to give God \"satisfaction\" as taught by Anselm, or as a punitive substitute as taught by the Reformers. Sin (separation from God, who is the source of all life) is its own punishment, capable of imprisoning the soul in an existence without life, without anything good, and without hope: hell by any measure. Life on earth is God's gift, to give humankind opportunity to make their choice real: separation or union.\nResurrection of Christ.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament. Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is believed to, according to Orthodox teaching, in his humanity be (that is, in history) crucified, and died, descending into Hades (Sheol), the place of the dead, as all humans do. But he, alone among humans, has two natures, one human, one divine, which are indivisible and inseparable from each other through the mystery of the incarnation. Hades could not restrain the infinite God. Christ in his divine nature captured the keys of Hades and broke the bonds which had imprisoned the human souls who had been held there through their separation from God.\nNeither could death contain the Son of God, the Fountain of Life, who arose from death even in his human nature. Not only this, but he opened the gates of Hades to all the righteous dead of past ages, rescuing them from their fallen human nature and restoring them to a nature of grace with God, bringing them back to life, this time in God's heavenly kingdom. And this path he opened to all who choose to follow him in time yet to come, thus saving the human race. Thus the Eastern Orthodox proclaim each year at the time of Pascha (Easter), that Christ \"trampled down death by death, and on those in the tombs bestowed life.\"\nThe celebration of the Resurrection of Christ at Pascha is the central event in the liturgical year of the Eastern Orthodox Church. According to Orthodox tradition, each human being may partake of this immortality, which would have been impossible without the Resurrection; it is the main promise held out by God in the New Testament. Every holy day of the Eastern Orthodox liturgical year relates to the Resurrection directly or indirectly. Every Sunday is especially dedicated to celebrating the Resurrection and the triune God, representing a mini-Pascha. In the liturgical commemorations of the Passion of Christ during Holy Week there are frequent allusions to the ultimate victory at its completion.\nChristian life.\nChurch teaching is that Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Eastern Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and \"hesychasm\", cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the church as a member of the body of Christ. It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next. The church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfillment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. The church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts. In Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the Church is sometimes called the \"communion of the saints\".\nVirgin Mary and other saints.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural\u2014a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognised by a large portion of the church a service of official recognition (glorification) is celebrated.\nThis does not \"make\" the person a saint; it merely recognises the fact and announces it to the rest of the church. A day is prescribed for the saint's celebration, hymns composed and icons created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshipped, for worship is due God alone (this view is also held by the Oriental Orthodox and Catholic Churches). In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Eastern Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.\nPre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary (commonly referred to as \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\") (\"Mother of God\"). In Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfillment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolizing the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed). Accordingly, the Eastern Orthodox consider Mary to be the Ark of the New Covenant and give her the respect and reverence as such. The Theotokos, in Orthodox teaching, was chosen by God and she freely co-operated in that choice to be the Mother of Jesus Christ, the God-man.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Christ, from the moment of his conception, was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\" as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to \"brothers\" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word \"brother\" was used in multiple ways, as was the term \"father\". Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honoured above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the holy mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. According to church teaching and tradition, God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since Biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.\nEschatology.\nOrthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Catholicism. The soul's experience of either of these states is only a \"foretaste\"\u2014being experienced only by the soul\u2014until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment. For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.\nWhile the Eastern Orthodox consider the text of the Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) to be a part of Scripture, it is also regarded to be a holy mystery. Speculation on the contents of Revelation are minimal and it is never read as part of the regular order of services. Those theologians who have delved into its pages tend to be amillennialist in their eschatology, believing that the \"thousand years\" spoken of in biblical prophecy refers to the present time: from the Crucifixion of Christ until the Second Coming.\nWhile it is not usually taught in church it is often used as a reminder of God's promise to those who love him, and of the benefits of avoiding sinful passions. Iconographic depictions of the Final Judgment are often portrayed on the back (western) wall of the church building to remind the departing faithful to be vigilant in their struggle against sin. Likewise it is often painted on the walls of the Trapeza (refectory) in a monastery where monks may be inspired to sobriety and detachment from worldly things while they eat.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Hell, though often described in metaphor as punishment inflicted by God, is in reality the soul's rejection of God's infinite love which is offered freely and abundantly to everyone.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:\nBible.\nThe official Bible of the Eastern Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament. Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council. They refer to the Bible as holy scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of holy tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief. The Bible provides the only texts held to be suitable for reading in Orthodox worship services. Through the many scriptural quotations embedded in the worship service texts themselves, it is often said that the Eastern Orthodox pray the Bible as well as read it.\nSt. Jerome completed the well-known Vulgate Latin translation only in the early 5th century, around the time the accepted lists of scripture were resolved in the west. The east took up to a century longer to resolve the lists in use there, and ended by accepting a few additional writings from the Septuagint that did not appear in the lists of the west. The differences were small and were not considered to compromise the unity of the faith shared between east and west. They did not play a role in the eventual schism in the 11th century that separated the See of Rome and the West from the See of Constantinople and the other apostolic Orthodox churches, and remained as defined essentially without controversy in the East or West for at least one thousand years. It was only in the 16th century that Reformation Protestants challenged the lists, proclaiming a canon that rejected those Old Testament books that did not appear in the 3rd-century Hebrew Bible. In response, the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches reaffirmed their accepted scriptural lists in more formal canons of their own.\nOnce established as holy scripture, there has never been any question that the Eastern Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study, even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the \"Anagignoskomena\" (\u1f00\u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03b9\u03b3\u03bd\u03c9\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03b1, \"things that are read\") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon, but deemed by the Eastern Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon. The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms), and hence does not participate in the various liturgical and prayer uses of the Psalter.\nIn a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the holy scripture the \"Word of God\". That is a title the Eastern Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. \"God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light.\" This is the Word which spoke the universe into being, and resonates in creation without diminution throughout all history, a Word of divine power.\nAs much as the Eastern Orthodox Church reveres and depends on the scriptures, they cannot compare to the Word of God's manifest action. But the Eastern Orthodox do believe that the holy scriptures testify to God's manifest actions in history, and that through its divine inspiration God's Word is manifested both in the scriptures themselves and in the cooperative human participation that composed them. It is in that sense that the Eastern Orthodox refer to the scriptures as \"God's Word\".\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of \"sola scriptura\". The church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is. Christ promised: \"When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth\". The Holy Spirit, then, is the infallible guide for the church to the interpretation of Scripture. The church depends upon those saints who, by lives lived in imitation of Christ, achieving theosis, can serve as reliable witnesses to the Holy Spirit's guidance. Individual interpretation occurs within the church and is informed by the church. It is rational and reasoned, but is not arrived at only by means of deductive reasoning.\nScriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text stills consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognisable forms. The Eastern Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible. In biblical interpretation, it does not use speculations, suggestive theories, or incomplete indications, not going beyond what is fully known.\nHoly tradition and the patristic consensus.\n\"That faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all\", the faith taught by Jesus to the apostles, given life by the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, and passed down to future generations without additions and without subtractions, is known as holy tradition. Holy tradition does not change in the Eastern Orthodox Church because it encompasses those things that do not change: the nature of the one God in Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the history of God's interactions with his peoples, the Law as given to the Israelites, all Christ's teaching as given to the disciples and Jews and recorded in scripture, including the parables, the prophecies, the miracles, and his own example to humanity in his extreme humility. It encompasses also the worship of the church, which grew out of the worship of the synagogue and temple and was extended by Christ at the last supper, and the relationship between God and his people which that worship expresses, which is also evidenced between Christ and his disciples. It includes the authority that Christ bestowed on his disciples when he made them apostles, for the preserving and teaching of the faith, and for governing the organisation and conduct of the church (in its administration by bishops).\nHoly tradition is firm, even unyielding, but not rigid or legalistic; instead, it lives and breathes within the church. For example, the New Testament was entirely written by the early church (mostly the apostles). The whole Bible was accepted as scripture by means of holy tradition practised within the early church. The writing and acceptance took five centuries, by which time the holy scriptures themselves had become in their entirety a part of holy tradition. But holy tradition did not change, because \"that faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all\" remained consistent, without additions, and without subtractions. The historical development of the Divine Liturgy and other worship services and devotional practices of the church provide a similar example of extension and growth \"without change\".\nThe continuity and stability of Orthodox worship throughout the centuries is one means by which holy tradition expresses the unity of the whole church throughout time. Not only can the Eastern Orthodox of today visit a church in a place that speaks a language unknown to the visitors yet have the service remain familiar and understandable to them, but the same would hold true were any able to visit past eras. The church strives to preserve holy tradition \"unchanging\" that it may express the one unchanging faith for all time to come as well.\nBesides these, holy tradition includes the doctrinal definitions and statements of faith of the seven ecumenical councils, including the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, and some later local councils, patristic writings, canon law, and icons. Not all portions of holy tradition are held to be equally strong. Some\u2014the holy scriptures foremost, certain aspects of worship, especially in the Divine Liturgy, the doctrines of the ecumenical councils, the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed\u2014possess a verified authority that endures forever, irrevocably. However, with local councils and patristic writings, the church applies a selective judgement. Some councils and writers have occasionally fallen into error, and some contradict each other.\nIn other cases, opinions differ, no consensus is forthcoming, and all are free to choose. With agreement among the Church Fathers, though, the authority of interpretation grows, and full patristic consensus is very strong. With canon law (which tends to be highly rigorous and very strict, especially with clergy) an unalterable validity also does not apply, since canons deal with living on earth, where conditions are always changing and each case is subject to almost infinite variation from the next. Even when and where they were once used with full strictness, their application was not absolute, and was carried out for individuals under the pastoral care of their bishop, who had the authority to decide when individual discipline had been satisfied. This too is a part of the holy tradition.\nBy tradition, the Eastern Orthodox Church, when faced with issues that are larger than a single bishop can resolve, holds a local council. The bishops and such others as may attend convene (as St. Paul called the Corinthians to do) to seek the \"mind of the church\". A council's declarations or edicts then reflect its consensus (if one can be found). An ecumencial council is only called for issues of such import or difficulty or pervasiveness that smaller councils are insufficient to address them. Ecumenical councils' declarations and canons carry binding weight by virtue of their representation across the whole church, by which the mind of the church can be readily seen. However, not all issues are so difficult as to require an ecumenical council to resolve. Some doctrines or decisions, not defined in a formal statement or proclaimed officially, nevertheless are held by the church unshakably and unanimously without internal disturbance, and these, also reflecting the mind of the church, are just as firmly irrevocable as a formal declaration of an ecumenical council. Lack of formality does not imply lack of authority within holy tradition. An example of such unanimity can be found in the acceptance in the 5th century of the lists of books that comprise holy scripture, a true canon without official stamp.\nTerritorial expansion and doctrinal integrity.\nDuring the course of the early church, there were numerous followers who attached themselves to the Christ and his mission here on Earth, as well as followers who retained the distinct duty of being commissioned with preserving the quality of life and lessons revealed through the experience of Jesus living, dying, resurrecting and ascending among them. As a matter of practical distinction and logistics, people of varying gifts were accorded stations within the community structure\u2014 ranging from the host of agape meals (shared with brotherly and fatherly love), to prophecy and the reading of Scripture, to preaching and interpretations and giving aid to the sick and the poor. Sometime after Pentecost the Church grew to a point where it was no longer possible for the Apostles to minister alone. Overseers (bishops) and assistants (deacons and deaconesses) were appointed to further the mission of the Church.\nThe church recognised the gathering of these early church communities as being greatest in areas of the known world that were famous for their significance on the world stage\u2014either as hotbeds of intellectual discourse, high volumes of trade, or proximity to the original sacred sites. These locations were targeted by the early apostles, who recognised the need for humanitarian efforts in these large urban centers and sought to bring as many people as possible into the church\u2014such a life was seen as a form of deliverance from the decadent lifestyles promoted throughout the eastern and western Roman empires.\nAs the church increased in size through the centuries, the logistic dynamics of operating such large entities shifted: patriarchs, metropolitans, archimandrites, abbots and abbesses, all rose up to cover certain points of administration.\nAs a result of heightened exposure and popularity of the philosophical schools (haereseis) of Greco-Roman society and education, synods and councils were forced to engage such schools that sought to co-opt the language and pretext of the Christian faith in order to gain power and popularity for their own political and cultural expansion. As a result, ecumenical councils were held to attempt to rebuild solidarity by using the strength of distant orthodox witnesses to dampen the intense local effects of particular philosophical schools within a given area.\nWhile originally intended to serve as an internal check and balance for the defense of the doctrine developed and spread by the apostles to the various sees against faulty local doctrine, at times the church found its own bishops and emperors falling prey to local conventions. At these crucial moments in the history of the church, it found itself able to rebuild on the basis of the faith as it was kept and maintained by monastic communities, who subsisted without reliance on the community of the state or popular culture and were generally unaffected by the materialism and rhetoric that often dominated and threatened the integrity and stability of the urban churches.\nIn this sense, the aim of the councils was not to expand or fuel a popular need for a clearer or relevant picture of the original apostolic teaching. Rather, the theologians spoke to address the issues of external schools of thought who wished to distort the simplicity and neutrality of the apostolic teaching for personal or political gain. The consistency of the Eastern Orthodox faith is entirely dependent on the holy tradition of the accepted corpus of belief\u2013the decisions ratified by the fathers of the seven ecumenical councils, and this is only done at the beginning of a consecutive council so that the effects of the decisions of the prior council can be audited and verified as being both conceptually sound and pragmatically feasible and beneficial for the church as a whole.\nWorship.\nChurch calendar.\nOne part of the autocephalous Orthodox churches follows the Julian calendar, while the other part follows the Revised Julian calendar. The autonomous Church of Finland of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, as well as parts of the Church of the Czech Lands and Slovakia, use the Gregorian calendar. Many church traditions, including the schedules of services, feasts, and fasts, are structured by the church's calendar, which provides a strictly observed intermingled set of cycles of varying lengths. The fixed annual cycle begins on 1 September and establishes the times for all annual observances that are fixed by date, such as Christmas. The annual Paschal cycle is established relative to the varying date of Pascha each year and affects the times for such observances as Pascha itself, Great Lent, Holy Week, and the feasts of Ascension and Pentecost.\nLesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.\nChurch services.\nThe services of the church are conducted each day according to the church calendar. Parts of each service remain fixed, while others change depending on the observances prescribed for the specific day in the various cycles, ever providing a flow of constancy within variation. Services are conducted in the church and involve both the clergy and faithful. Services cannot properly be conducted by a single person, but must have at least one other person present (i.e. a priest cannot celebrate alone, but must have at least a chanter present and participating).\nUsually, all of the services are conducted on a daily basis only in monasteries and cathedrals, while parish churches might only do the services on the weekend and major feast days. On certain Great Feasts (and, according to some traditions, every Sunday) a special All-Night Vigil (\"Agrypnia\") will be celebrated from late at night on the eve of the feast until early the next morning. Because of its festal nature it is usually followed by a breakfast feast shared together by the congregation.\nServices, especially the Divine Liturgy, may only be celebrated once a day on a single altar (some churches have multiple altars in order to accommodate large congregations). Each priest may only celebrate the Divine Liturgy once a day.\nFrom its Jewish roots, the liturgical day begins at sundown. The traditional daily cycle of services is as follows:\nThe Divine Liturgy is the celebration of the Eucharist. Although it is usually celebrated between the Sixth and Ninth Hours, it is not considered to be part of the daily cycle of services, as it occurs outside the normal time of the world. The Divine Liturgy is not celebrated on weekdays during Great Lent, and in some places during the lesser fasting seasons either; however, reserve communion is prepared on Sundays and is distributed during the week at the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.\nOther items brought to the altar during the Divine Liturgy include a gold or silver chalice with red wine, a small metallic urn of warm water, a metallic communion spoon, a little metallic spear, a sponge, a metal disk with cut pieces of bread upon it, and a star, which is a star-shaped piece of metal over which the priest places a cloth covering when transporting the holy gifts to and from the altar. Also found on the altar table is the antimins. The antimins is a silk cloth, signed by the appropriate diocesan bishop, upon which the sanctification of the holy gifts takes place during each Divine Liturgy. The antimins contain the relics of a saint. When a church is consecrated by a bishop, there is a formal service or prayers and sanctification in the name of the saint that the church is named after. The bishop will also often present a small relic of a saint to place in or on the altar as part of the consecration of a new church.\nThe book containing liturgically read portions of the four gospels is permanently \"enthroned\" on the altar table. Eastern Orthodox bishops, priests, deacons and readers sing/chant specific verses from this Gospel Book on each different day of the year.\nThis daily cycle services is conceived of as both the sanctification of time (\"chronos\", the specific times during which they are celebrated), and entry into eternity (\"kairos\"). They consist to a large degree of litanies asking for God's mercy on the living and the dead, readings from the Psalter with introductory prayers, troparia, and other prayers and hymns surrounding them. The Psalms are so arranged that when all the services are celebrated the entire Psalter is read through in their course once a week, and twice a week during Great Lent when the services are celebrated in an extended form.\nMusic and chanting.\nOrthodox services are sung nearly in their entirety. Services consist in part of a dialogue between the clergy and the people (often represented by the choir or the Psaltis Cantor). In each case the prayers are sung or chanted following a prescribed musical form. Almost nothing is read in a normal speaking voice, with the exception of the homily if one is given.\nBecause the human voice is seen as the most perfect instrument of praise, musical instruments (organs, etc.) are not generally used to accompany the choir.\nThe church has developed eight modes or tones (see Octoechos) within which a chant may be set, depending on the time of year, feast day, or other considerations of the Typikon. There are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures. It is common, especially in the United States, for a choir to learn many different styles and to mix them, singing one response in Greek, then English, then Russian, etc.\nIn the Russian tradition there have been some famous composers of \"unaccompanied\" church music, such as Tchaikovsky (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 41, 1878, and All-Night Vigil, op. 52, 1882) and Rachmaninoff (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 31, 1910, and All-Night Vigil, op. 37, 1915); and many church tones can likewise be heard influencing their music.\nIncense.\nAs part of the legacy handed down from its Judaic roots, incense is used during all services in the Eastern Orthodox Church as an offering of worship to God as it was done in the Jewish First and Second Temples in Jerusalem (Exodus chapter 30). Incense is also prophesied in the book of as a \"pure offering\" in the glorification of God by the Gentiles in \"every place\" where the name of God is regarded as \"great\". Traditionally, the base of the incense used is the resin of Boswellia sacra, also known as frankincense, but the resin of fir trees has been used as well. It is usually mixed with various floral essential oils giving it a sweet smell.\nIncense represents the sweetness of the prayers of the saints rising up to God (, , ). The incense is burned in an ornate golden censer that hangs at the end of three chains representing the Trinity. Two chains represent the human and Godly nature of the Son, one chain for the Father and one chain for the Holy Spirit. The lower cup represents the earth and the upper cup the heaven. In the Greek, Slavic, and Syrian traditions there are 12 bells hung along these chains representing the 12 apostles. There are also 72 links representing 72 evangelists.\nThe charcoal represents the sinners. Fire signifies the Holy Spirit and frankincense the good deeds. The incense also represents the grace of the Trinity. The censer is used (swung back and forth) by the priest/deacon to venerate all four sides of the altar, the holy gifts, the clergy, the icons, the congregation, and the church structure itself. Incense is also used in the home where the individual will go around the house and \"cross\" all of the icons saying in Greek: \u1f0d\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f41 \u0398\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2, \u1f0d\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f30\u03c3\u03c7\u03c5\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2, \u1f0d\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f00\u03b8\u03ac\u03bd\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2, \u1f10\u03bb\u03ad\u03b7\u03c3\u03bf\u03bd \u1f21\u03bc\u1fb6\u03c2, or in English: Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.\nFasting.\nThe number of fast days varies from year to year, but in general the Eastern Orthodox Christian can expect to spend a little over half the year fasting at some level of strictness. There are spiritual, symbolic, and even practical reasons for fasting. In the Fall from Paradise mankind became possessed by a carnal nature; that is to say, became inclined towards the passions. Through fasting, Orthodox Christians attempt to return to the relationship of love and obedience to God enjoyed by Adam and Eve in Paradise in their own lives, by refraining from carnal practices, by bridling the tongue (), confession of sins, prayer and almsgiving.\nFasting is seen as purification and the regaining of innocence. It is a practice of learning to temper the body's primary desire for food. By learning to temper this basic desire of the body, the practitioner can more readily temper other worldly desires, and thus, become better enabled to draw closer to God in the hope of becoming more Christ-like. Through obedience to the church and its ascetic practices the Eastern Orthodox Christian seeks to rid himself or herself of the \"passions\" (The desires of our fallen carnal nature). All Orthodox Christians are provided with a prescribed set of guidelines. They do not view fasting as a hardship, but rather as a privilege and joy. The teaching of the Church provides both the time and the amount of fasting that is expected as a minimum for every member who chooses to participate. For greater ascesis, some may choose to go without food entirely for a short period of time. A complete three-day fast at the beginning and end of a fasting period is not unusual, and some fast for even longer periods, though this is usually practised only in monasteries.\nIn general, fasting means abstaining from meat and meat products, dairy (eggs and cheese) and dairy products, fish, olive oil, and wine. Wine and oil\u2014and, less frequently, fish\u2014are allowed on certain feast days when they happen to fall on a day of fasting; but animal products and dairy are forbidden on fast days, with the exception of \"Cheese Fare\" week which precedes Great Lent, during which dairy products are allowed. Wine and oil are usually also allowed on Saturdays and Sundays during periods of fast. In some Orthodox traditions, caviar is permitted on Lazarus Saturday, the Saturday before Palm Sunday, although the day is otherwise a fast day. Married couples also abstain from sexual activity on fast days so that they may devote themselves fulsomely to prayer ().\nWhile it may seem that fasting in the manner set forth by the Church is a strict rule, there are circumstances where a person's spiritual guide may allow an Economy because of some physical necessity (e.g. those who are pregnant or infirm, the very young and the elderly, or those who have no control over their diet, such as prisoners or soldiers).\nThe time and type of fast is generally uniform for all Orthodox Christians; the times of fasting are part of the ecclesiastical calendar, and the method of fasting is set by canon law and holy tradition. There are four major fasting periods during the year: Nativity Fast, Great Lent, Apostles' Fast, and the Dormition Fast. In addition to these fasting seasons, Orthodox Christians fast on every Wednesday (in commemoration of Christ's betrayal by Judas Iscariot), and Friday (in commemoration of Christ's Crucifixion) throughout the year. Monastics often fast on Mondays.\nOrthodox Christians who are preparing to receive the Eucharist do not eat or drink at all from vespers (sunset) until after taking Holy Communion. A similar total fast is expected to be kept on the Eve of Nativity, the Eve of Theophany (Epiphany), Great Friday and Holy Saturday for those who can do so. There are other individual days observed as fasts (though not as days of total fasting) no matter what day of the week they fall on, such as the Beheading of St. John the Baptist on 29 August and the Exaltation of the Holy Cross on 14 September.\nAlmsgiving.\nAlmsgiving, more comprehensively described as \"acts of mercy\", refers to any giving of oneself in charity to someone who has a need, such as material resources, work, assistance, counsel, support, or kindness. Along with prayer and fasting, it is considered a pillar of the personal spiritual practices of the Eastern Orthodox Christian tradition. Almsgiving is particularly important during periods of fasting, when the Eastern Orthodox believer is expected to share with those in need the monetary savings from his or her decreased consumption. As with fasting, mentioning to others one's own virtuous deeds tends to reflect a sinful pride, and may also be considered extremely rude.\nTraditions.\nMonasticism.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church places heavy emphasis and awards a high level of prestige to traditions of monasticism and asceticism with roots in Early Christianity in the Near East and Byzantine Anatolia. The most important centres of Christian Orthodox monasticism are Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula (Egypt) and Mount Athos in Northern Greece.\nAll Orthodox Christians are expected to participate in at least some ascetic works, in response to the commandment of Christ to \"come, take up the cross, and follow me.\" (Mark 10:21 and elsewhere) They are therefore all called to imitate, in one way or another, Christ himself who denied himself to the extent of literally taking up the cross on the way to his voluntary self-sacrifice. However, laypeople are not expected to live in extreme asceticism since this is close to impossible while undertaking the normal responsibilities of worldly life.\nThose who wish to do this therefore separate themselves from the world and live as monastics: monks and nuns. As ascetics \"par excellence\", using the allegorical weapons of prayer and fasting in spiritual warfare against their passions, monastics hold a very special and important place in the Church. This kind of life is often seen as incompatible with any kind of worldly activity including that which is normally regarded as virtuous. Social work, school teaching, and other such work is therefore usually left to laypeople. Ascetics of the Eastern Orthodox Church are recognised by their long hair, and in case of male monks, long beards.\nThere are three main types of monastics. Those who live in monasteries under a common rule are \"coenobitic\". Each monastery may formulate its own rule, and although there are no religious orders in Orthodoxy some respected monastic centers such as Mount Athos are highly influential. \"Eremitic\" monks, or hermits, are those who live solitary lives. It is the yearning of many who enter the monastic life to eventually become solitary hermits. This most austere life is only granted to the most advanced monastics and only when their superiors feel they are ready for it.\nHermits are usually associated with a larger monastery but live in seclusion some distance from the main compound. Their local monastery will see to their physical needs, supplying them with simple foods while disturbing them as little as possible. In between are those in \"semi-eremitic\" communities, or \"sketes\", where one or two monks share each of a group of nearby dwellings under their own rules and only gather together in the central chapel, or \"katholikon\", for liturgical observances.\nThe spiritual insight gained from their ascetic struggles make monastics preferred for missionary activity. Bishops are almost always chosen from among monks, and those who are not generally receive the monastic tonsure before their consecrations.\nMany (but not all) Orthodox seminaries are attached to monasteries, combining academic preparation for ordination with participation in the community's life of prayer. Monks who have been ordained to the priesthood are called \"hieromonk\" (priest-monk); monks who have been ordained to the diaconate are called \"hierodeacon\" (deacon-monk). Not all monks live in monasteries, some hieromonks serve as priests in parish churches thus practising \"monasticism in the world\".\nCultural practices differ slightly, but in general \"Father\" is the correct form of address for monks who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as \"Brother\". Similarly, \"Mother\" is the correct form of address for nuns who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as \"Sister\". Nuns live identical ascetic lives to their male counterparts and are therefore also called \"monachoi\" (monastics) or the feminine plural form in Greek, \"monachai\", and their common living space is called a monastery.\nIcons and symbols.\nEverything in the Eastern Orthodox Church has a purpose and a meaning revealing God's revelation to man. At the front, or eastern end of the church, is a raised dais with an icon-covered screen or wall (iconostasis or templon) separating the nave from the sanctuary. In the center of this wall is the entrance to the altar known as the \"Royal Doors\" through which only the clergy may pass.\nThere is a right and left side door on the front of the iconostasis, one depicting the archangel, Michael and the other Gabriel. The priest and altar boys enter and exit through these doors during appropriate parts of the Divine Liturgy. Immediately to the right of the main gate you will always find an icon of Jesus Christ, on the left, an icon of the Theotokos (Mother of God). Other icons depicted on the iconostasis are Saint John the Forerunner and the Saint after which the church is named.\nIn front of the iconostasis is the bishop's chair, a place of honor where a visiting bishop or metropolitan will often sit when visiting the church. An Orthodox priest, when standing at the altar during the Divine Liturgy, faces toward the altar (typically facing east) and properly leads his congregation while together they perform the mystical sacrifice and pray to God.\nThe sanctuary contains the Holy Altar, representing the place where Orthodox Christians believe that Christ was born of the virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, laid in the tomb, descended into hell, rose from the dead on the third day, ascended into heaven, and will return again at his second coming. A free-standing cross, bearing the body of Christ, may stand behind the altar. On the altar are a cloth covering, a large book containing the gospel readings performed during services, an ark containing presanctified divine gifts (bread and wine) distributed by the deacon or priest to those who cannot come to the church to receive them, and several white beeswax candles.\nIcons.\nThe term 'icon' comes from the Greek word \"eikon\", which simply means image. The Eastern Orthodox believe that the first icons of Christ and the Virgin Mary were painted by Luke the Evangelist. Icons are filled with symbolism designed to convey information about the person or event depicted. For this reason, icons tend to be formulaic, following a prescribed methodology for how a particular person should be depicted, including hair style, body position, clothing, and background details.\nIcon painting, in general, is not an opportunity for artistic expression, though each iconographer brings a vision to the piece. It is far more common for an icon to be copied from an older model, though with the recognition of a new saint in the church, a new icon must be created and approved. The personal and creative traditions of Catholic religious art were largely lacking in Orthodox icon painting before the 17th century, when Russian icons began to be strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from both Protestant and Catholic Europe. Greek icons also began to take on a strong western influence for a period and the difference between some Orthodox icons and western religious art began to vanish. More recently there has been a trend of returning to the more traditional and symbolic representations.\nAspects of the iconography borrow from the pre-Christian Roman and Hellenistic art. Henry Chadwick wrote, \"In this instinct there was a measure of truth. The representations of Christ as the Almighty Lord on his judgment throne owed something to pictures of Zeus. Portraits of the Mother of God were not wholly independent of a pagan past of venerated mother-goddesses. In the popular mind the saints had come to fill a role that had been played by heroes and deities.\"\nLarge free-standing statues (three-dimensional depictions) are almost non-existent in the Eastern Orthodox Church. This is partly because cult images of the Greek gods were a focus of the ancient Greek religion and its Roman equivalent, and much criticised by Early Christian writers, and partly because icons are meant to show the spiritual nature of man, not the sensual earthly body. Reliefs, however, were used in Byzantine art.\nIcons are not considered by the Eastern Orthodox to be idols or objects of worship. The parameters of their usage were clearly spelled out by the 7th ecumenical council. Justification for their usage utilises the following logic: before God took human form in Christ, no material depiction was possible and therefore blasphemous even to contemplate. Once God became incarnate, depiction was possible.\nAs Christ is believed to be God, it is justified to hold in one's mind the image of God-incarnate. Likewise, when one venerates an icon, it is not the wood or paint that are venerated but rather the individual shown, just as it is not the paper one loves when one might kiss the photograph of a loved one. As Saint Basil famously proclaimed, honour or veneration of the icon always passes to its archetype. Following this reasoning, the veneration of the glorified human saint made in God's image, is always a veneration of the divine image, and hence God as foundational archetype.\nIcons can be found adorning the walls of churches and often cover the inside structure completely. Most Orthodox homes have an area set aside for family prayer, usually an eastern facing wall, where are hung many icons. Icons have been part of Orthodox Christianity since the beginning of the church.\nIcons are often illuminated by a candle or oil lamp (beeswax for candles and olive oil for lamps are preferred because they are natural and burn cleanly). Besides the practical purpose of making icons visible in an otherwise dark church, both candles and oil lamps symbolise the Light of the World, who is Christ.\nTales of miraculous icons are not uncommon, though it has always been considered that the message of such an event was for the immediate faithful involved and therefore does not usually attract crowds. Some miraculous icons whose reputations span long periods of time nevertheless become objects of pilgrimage along with the places where they are kept. As several Orthodox theologians and saints have explored in the past, the icon's miraculous nature is found not in the material, but in the glory of the saint who is depicted. The icon is a window, in the words of Paul Florensky, that actually participates in the glory of what it represents.\nIconostasis.\nAn \"iconostasis\", also called the \"templon\", is a wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary in a church. \"Iconostasis\" also refers to a portable icon stand that can be placed anywhere within a church. The modern iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine templon in the 11th century. The evolution of the iconostasis probably owes a great deal to 14th-century Hesychast mysticism and the wood-carving genius of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nThe first ceiling-high, five-leveled Russian iconostasis was designed by Andrey Rublyov in the cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir in 1408. The separation between sanctuary and nave accomplished by the iconostasis is not mandatory, though it is common practice. Depending on circumstance, the role of the iconostasis can be played by masonry, carved panels, screens, curtains, railings, a cord or rope, plain icons on stands, steps, or nothing at all.\nCross.\nDepictions of the cross within the Eastern Orthodox Church are numerous and often highly ornamented, but its use does not extend to all Orthodox traditions. Some carry special significance. The Tri-Bar Cross, popular in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, but common throughout the Eastern Orthodox world, seen to the right, has three bars. Its origins are in the early Byzantine Church of the 4th century AD.\nThe small top crossbar represents the sign that Pontius Pilate nailed above Christ's head. It often is inscribed with an acronym, \"INRI\", Latin, meaning \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\" or \"INBI\", Greek, \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\"; however, it is often replaced or amplified by the phrase \"The King of Glory\" in order to answer Pilate's statement with Christ's affirmation, \"My Kingdom is not of this world\".\nThere is also a bottom slanting bar which has several explanations. Claims of evidence indicate that there was a small wooden platform for the crucified to stand on in order to support his weight; in Jesus' case his feet were nailed side by side to this platform with one nail each in order to prolong the torture of the cross.\nImplied evidence for this comes mainly from two sources, namely, the Bible (in order to cause the victim to die faster, his legs were broken so they could not support his weight and he would suffocate) and iconography (all early depictions of the crucifixion show this arrangement, not the later with feet on top with single nail). It has also been pointed out by some experts that the nailed hands of a body crucified in the manner often shown in modern secular art would not support the weight of the body and would tear through. A platform for the feet would relieve this problem.\nThat the bottom bar is slanted has two explanations, to represent the very real agony which Christ experienced on the cross (a refutation of Docetism) and to signify that the thief on Christ's right chose the right path while the thief on the left did not.\nOther crosses associated with the Eastern Orthodox Church are the more traditional single-bar crosses, budded designs, the Greek cross, the Latin cross, the Jerusalem cross (cross patt\u00e9e), Celtic crosses, and others. A common symbolism of the slanted foot stool is The foot-rest points up, toward Heaven, on Christ's right hand-side, and downward, to Hades, on Christ's left. \"Between two thieves Thy Cross did prove to be a balance of\nrighteousness: wherefore one of them was dragged down to Hades by the\nweight of his blasphemy \"[the balance points downward],\" whereas the other was lightened of his transgressions unto the comprehension of theology \"[the balance points upward].\" O Christ God, glory to Thee.\" Another Orthodox cross which is worn in gold is an outer budded cross with an inner Three Bar Cross. The inscription Jesus Christ in Greek: IC (Iesous) on the left side bar and XC (Xhristos) on the right side bar, with a sun on the top of the cross. There is also typically an inscription on the back in Church Slavonic: \"\u0441\u043f\u0430\u0441\u0438 \u0438 \u0441\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0430\u043d\u0438\", \"\"Spasi i Sokhrani\", \"Save and Protect\"\". This cross is known as the Saint Olga Cross.\nArt and architecture.\nThe church building has many symbolic meanings; perhaps the oldest and most prominent is the concept that the church is the Ark (as in Noah's) in which the world is saved from the flood of temptations; therefore, most Orthodox churches are rectangular in design. Another popular configuration, especially for churches with large choirs is cruciform or cross-shaped or what is called the \"Greek-cross.\"\nArchitectural patterns vary in shape and complexity, with chapels sometimes added around the main church, or triple altars; but in general, the symbolic layout of the church remains the same. Each church is created with specified qualifications based on what the apostles said in the Bible. These qualifications include how big the temple should be.\nThe church building is divided into three main parts: the narthex (vestibule), the nave and the sanctuary (also called the \"altar\" or \"holy place\"). The narthex is where catechumens and non-Orthodox visitors were traditionally asked to stand during services. It is separated from the nave by \"The Royal Gate\". On each side of this gate are candle stands (menalia) representing the pillars of fire that went before the Hebrew people escaping from Egypt.\nThe nave is where most of the congregation stand during services. Traditionally, men stand on the right and women on the left. This is for a number of reasons: (1) Considering the family unit of past centuries the husband was dominant; thus, standing the same distance from the altar, equality is emphasised. (2) The idea of separating the sexes was inherited from the Jewish tradition of doing so within synagogues (3) Separation of sexes also followed the practice of choirs in which different levels of voice are placed in groups to facilitate harmony.\nIn general, men and women dress respectfully, typically wearing their \"Sunday best\" to enter the church. Often, women cover their heads as prescribed by Paul (1 Cor. 11:13). Children are considered full members of the church and stand attentively and quietly during services. There is often a choir area at the side or in a loft in back. In addition to the choir, a chanter is always present at the front of the church to chant responses and hymns that are part of the Divine Liturgy offered by the priest. There is usually a dome in the ceiling with an icon of Christ depicted as Ruler of the Universe (Pantocrator).\nThe Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.\nApart from the icons, the Eastern Orthodox churches and monasteries are often decorated with frescos and mosaics.\nLocal customs.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church also has many associated traditions (sometimes referred to simply as customs), compatible with its life and function, but not necessarily tied so closely to the faith itself. These are not generally regarded as a part of holy tradition, though no strict dividing line is drawn. As long as compatibility is maintained, general practice often tends to the permissive rather than the restrictive, with the local priest or bishop resolving questions.\nMany of these customs are local or cultural, and some are not even especially religious, but form a part of the church's relationship with the people in the time and place where it exists. Where outside customs affect church practices such as worship, a closer watch is kept for guarding the integrity of worship, but suitable local differences are welcomed and celebrated joyfully. The local church customs, especially liturgical ones, are referred to as differences in typica (Style).\nLocality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Montenegrin Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as \"Rum\" (\"Roman\") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\nDifferences in \"praxis\" (\"practice\") tend to be slight, involving things such as the order in which a particular set of hymns are sung or what time a particular service is celebrated. But observances of the saints' days of local saints are more often celebrated in special services within a locality, as are certain national holidays, like Greek Independence Day. In North America, observances of Thanksgiving Day are increasing.\nMembers of the church are fully united in faith and the sacred mysteries with all Orthodox congregations, regardless of nationality or location. In general, Orthodox Christians could travel the globe and feel familiar with the services even if they did not know the language being used.\nIn the Levant, Christian Orthodox services and identity often combine both the Byzantine Greek and indigenous (Arabic and Aramaic) traditions. Other Orthodox communities can identify with two Eastern Orthodox churches simultaneously, for example Caucasus Greeks and Pontic Greeks in Russia often identify with both the Greek Orthodox Church and Russian Orthodox Church, as a result of centuries of assimilation and intermarriage with ethnic Russians and other Christian Orthodox communities in mainly southern Russia.\nHoly mysteries (sacraments).\nAccording to Orthodox theology, the purpose of the Christian life is to attain \"theosis\", the mystical union of mankind with God. This union is understood as both collective and individual. St. Athanasius of Alexandria wrote concerning the Incarnation that, \"He (Jesus) was made man that we might be made god (\u03b8\u03b5\u03bf\u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03b7\u03b8\u1ff6\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd).\" (see , , ). The entire life of the church is oriented towards making this possible and facilitating it.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church the terms \"mystery\" or \"the mysteries\" refer to the process of \"theosis\". While it is understood that God theoretically can do anything instantly and invisibly, it is also understood that he generally chooses to use material substance as a medium in order to reach people. The limitations are those of mankind, not God. Matter is not considered to be evil by the Eastern Orthodox. Water, oil, bread, wine, etc., all are means by which God reaches out to allow people to draw closer to him. How this process works is a \"mystery\" and cannot be defined in human terms. These mysteries are surrounded by prayer and symbolism so that their true meaning will not be forgotten.\nThose things which in the West are often termed sacraments or sacramentals are known among the Eastern Orthodox as the \"sacred mysteries\". While the Roman Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Eastern Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms will often speak of the seven great mysteries. Among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), baptism, Chrismation, confession, unction, matrimony, and ordination. But the term also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.\nBaptism.\nBaptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection. Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.\nChildren of Orthodox families are normally baptised shortly after birth. Converts to Orthodoxy are usually formally baptised into the Orthodox Church, though exceptions are sometimes made. Those who have left Orthodoxy and adopted a new religion, if they return to their Orthodox roots, are usually received back into the church through the mystery of Chrismation.\nProperly, the mystery of baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptise. In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptised by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.\nThe service of Baptism used in Orthodox churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his \"Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism\", describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.\nChrismation.\nChrismation (sometimes called confirmation) is the mystery by which a baptised person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism. It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Orthodox Church. As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.\nA baptised and chrismated Orthodox Christian is a full member of the church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.\nThe creation of Chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. (Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others.) Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.\nHoly Communion (Eucharist).\nThe Eucharist is at the center of Orthodox Christianity. In practice, it is the partaking of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the midst of the Divine Liturgy with the rest of the church. The bread and wine are believed to become the genuine body and blood of the Christ Jesus through the operation of the Holy Spirit. The Orthodox Church has never described exactly how this occurs, or gone into the detail that the Catholic Church has in the West.\nCommunion is given only to baptised and chrismated Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a \"cochlear\", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice. From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.\nBecause of the Orthodox understanding of mankind's fallen nature in general those who wish to commune prepare themselves in a way that reflects mankind in paradise. First, they prepare by having their confession heard and the prayer of repentance read over them by a priest. They will increase their prayer rule, adding the prescribed prayers in preparation for communing. Finally, they will fast completely from food and drink from the evening of the previous day (usually sunset on Saturday if communing on Sunday).\nRepentance (Confession).\nOrthodox Christians who have committed sins but repent of them, and who wish to reconcile themselves to God and renew the purity of their original baptisms, confess their sins to God before a spiritual guide who offers advice and direction to assist the individual in overcoming their sin. Parish priests commonly function as spiritual guides, but such guides can be any person, male or female (not commonly a layperson but in these cases monks or nuns), who has been given a blessing to hear confessions. Spiritual guides are chosen very carefully as this is a mandate that once chosen must be obeyed. Having confessed, the penitent then has his or her parish priest read the prayer of absolution over them.\nSin is not viewed by the Orthodox as a stain on the soul that needs to be wiped out, or a legal transgression that must be set right by a punitive sentence, but rather as a mistake made by the individual with the opportunity for spiritual growth and development. An act of penance (\"epitemia\"), if the spiritual guide requires it, is never formulaic, but rather is directed toward the individual and their particular problem, as a means of establishing a deeper understanding of the mistake made, and how to effect its cure. Because full participatory membership is granted to infants, it is not unusual for even small children to confess; though the scope of their culpability is far less than an older child, still their opportunity for spiritual growth remains the same.\nMarriage.\nFrom the Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and his Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union. The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.\nJesus said that \"when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven\" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be \"fleshy\", but \"spiritual\". Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and Church, is eternal.\nThe church does recognise that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the church towards sinful man. Ecclesiastically divorced Orthodox (not civilly divorced only) are usually allowed to remarry in the Orthodox Church, though there is usually imposed on them a fairly severe penance by their bishop and the services for a second marriage in this case are more penitential than joyful. Widows are permitted to remarry without repercussion and their second marriage is considered just as valid as the first. One exception to this rule is the clergy and their wives. Should a married priest die, it is normal that his wife will retire to a monastery once their children are out of the house. Widowed priests are not allowed to remarry (no priest may be married after his ordination) and also frequently end up in monasteries.\nThe service of marriage in the Orthodox Church has two distinct parts: the betrothal (engagement) and the crowning. There is no exchange of vows. There is a set expectation of the obligations incumbent on a married couple, and whatever promises they may have privately to each other are their responsibility to keep.\nHoly orders.\nSince its founding, the church spread to different places and its leaders in each region came to be known as \"episkopoi\" (\"overseers\", plural of \"episkopos\", overseer\u2014Gr. \u1f10\u03c0\u03af\u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), which became \"bishop\" in English. The other ordained roles are \"presbyter\" (Gr. , elder), which became \"prester\" and then \"priest\" in English, and \"diakonos\" (Gr. , servant), which became \"deacon\" in English (see also subdeacon). There are numerous administrative positions among the clergy that carry additional titles.\nIn the Greek tradition, bishops who occupy an ancient see are called metropolitans, while the lead bishop in Greece is the archbishop. (In the Russian tradition, however, the usage of the terms \"metropolitan\" and \"archbishop\" is reversed.) Priests can be archpriests, archimandrites or protopresbyters. Deacons can also be archdeacons or protodeacons. The position of deacon is often occupied for life. The deacon also acts as an assistant to a bishop.\nWith the exception of bishops, who remain celibate, the Orthodox Church has always allowed priests and deacons to be married, provided the marriage takes place before ordination. In general it is considered preferable for parish priests to be married as they often act as counsel to married couples and thus can draw on their own experience. Unmarried priests are usually monks and live in monasteries, though there are occasions when, because of a lack of married priests, a monk-priest is temporarily assigned to a parish.\nWidowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to receive holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church. However, it has fallen out of practice (the last deaconess was ordained in the 19th century).\nIn 2017, Patriarch Theodoros II and the Holy Synod of the Patriarchate of Alexandria decided to reinstate the order of deaconesses in the Greek Orthodox Church. In February, he appointed six nuns to be subdeacons within the church.\nUnction.\nAnointing with oil, often called \"unction\", is one of the mysteries administered by the Orthodox Church and is not reserved only for the dying or terminally ill, but for all in need of spiritual or bodily healing. In Greece, during the Ottoman occupation, it became the custom to administer this mystery annually on Great Wednesday to all believers; in recent decades, this custom has spread to many other locations. It is often distributed on major feast days, or any time the clergy believe it necessary for the spiritual welfare of its congregation.\nAccording to Orthodox teaching unction is based on the Epistle of James:\nIs anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.\u2014\nHistory.\nEarly Church.\nPaul and the Apostles traveled extensively throughout the Roman Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing Churches in major communities, with the first churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome. Christianity encountered considerable resistance in the Roman Empire, because its adherents refused to comply with the demands of the Roman state (even when their lives were threatened) by offering sacrifices to the pagan gods. Despite persecution, the Christian Church spread. The persecution dissipated upon the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in 312\u00a0AD.\nBy the 4th century Christianity had spread to numerous regions. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the Church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod in order to define the Church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location, but by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the Church. Most modern Christian Churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council, as of major importance.\nEcumenical councils.\nSeveral doctrinal disputes from the 4th century onwards led to the calling of ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Christian Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an ecumenical council.\nThere are seven councils authoritatively recognised as ecumenical:\nThere are also two other councils which are considered ecumenical by some Orthodox. All Orthodox agree that the decisions of these further councils are valid; the disagreement is only whether they carry sufficient importance to be considered truly \"ecumenical:\"\nIn addition to these councils there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena including Modernism, other Christian confessions, Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.\nRoman/Byzantine Empire.\nEastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Greece, Georgia, Ukraine, as well as in Russia and Asia.\nIn the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I. Beginning with subsequent Byzantine architecture, Hagia Sophia became the paradigmatic Orthodox church form and its architectural style was emulated by Ottoman mosques a thousand years later. Being the episcopal see of the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople, it remained the world's largest cathedral for nearly a thousand years, until Seville Cathedral was completed in 1520. Hagia Sophia has been described as \"holding a unique position in the Christian world\", and architectural and cultural icon of Byzantine and Eastern Orthodox civilization, and it is considered the epitome of Byzantine architecture and is said to have \"changed the history of architecture\".\nEarly schisms.\nThere are the \"Nestorian\" churches resulted from the reaction of the Council of Ephesus (431), which are the earliest surviving Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea (325) and the First Council of Constantinople (381) as legitimate. \"Nestorian\" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lay in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teachers Theodore of Mopsuestia or Diodore of Tarsus. The modern incarnation of the \"Nestorian Church\" is commonly referred to as \"the Assyrian Church\" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.\nThe church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematizing the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective \"Greek\" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire. However, those who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt, and today they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and in the whole Middle East. There was also a similar, albeit smaller scale, split in Syria (Patriarchate of Antioch), which resulted in the separation of the Syriac Orthodox Church from the Byzantine Patriarchate of Antioch.\nThose who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are sometimes called \"Oriental Orthodox\" to distinguish them from the \"Eastern Orthodox\", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as \"non-Chalcedonians\", or \"anti-Chalcedonians\". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term \"miaphysite\", to denote the \"united\" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one) consistent with St. Cyril's theology: \"The term union...signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united\" and \"the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description\" (St. Cyril of Alexandria, \"On the Unity of Christ\"). Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church, although over the last several decades there has been considerable reconciliation and the prospect of reunification has been discussed.\nConversion of South and East Slavs.\nIn the 9th and 10th centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Bulgaria (864) and later Kievan Rus' (988). This work was made possible by the work of the Byzantine-era saints Cyril and Methodius. When king Rastislav of Moravia asked Byzantium for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language, Byzantine emperor Michael III chose these two brothers. Cyril and Methodius translated the Bible and many of the prayer books. With time, as the translations prepared by them were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese. Their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886 and emigrated to Bulgaria.\nAfter the Christianisation of Bulgaria in 864, the disciples of saints Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, the most important being Saint Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum of Preslav, were of great importance to the Orthodox faith in the First Bulgarian Empire. In a short time they managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 870 the Fourth Council of Constantinople granted the Bulgarians the right to have the oldest organised autocephalous Slavic Orthodox Church that little later, from autonomous Bulgarian archbishopric, became Patriarchate. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of East Slavic peoples, most notably the Rus', predecessors of Belarusians, Russians, and Ukrainians. Major event is the development of the Cyrillic script in Bulgaria at the Preslav Literary School in the 9th century. The Cyrillic script and the liturgy in Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian, were declared official in Bulgaria in 893.\nThe work of the Thessaloniki brothers Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact to Serbs as well. However, they accepted Christianity collectively by families and by tribes (in the process between the 7th and the 9th century). In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honor the Saint on whose day they received the sacrament of Holy Baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava is actually the celebration of the spiritual birthday of the Serbian people which the Church blessed and proclaimed it a Church institution.\nThe missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire, or Latin, as the Roman priests did. Today the Russian Orthodox Church is the largest of the Orthodox Churches.\nGreat Schism (1054).\nIn the 11th century what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine Churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Roman Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralisation of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to papal approvals. It used to be that the emperor would at least have say when a new Pope would be elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.\nThe final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which was importantly also strongly condemned by the Pope at the time (Innocent III, see reference at end of paragraph); the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. Many things that were stolen during this time\u2014holy relics, riches, and many other items\u2014were not returned and are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.\nReunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. Some local Eastern churches have, however, renewed union with Rome in time since (see Eastern Catholic Churches). Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Churches.\nGreek Church under Ottoman rule.\nIn 1453, the Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire. By this time Egypt had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries, but Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia which had recently acquired an autocephalous status; and thus Moscow called itself the Third Rome, as the cultural heir of Constantinople.\nUnder Ottoman rule, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous \"millet\". The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the R\u00fbm (Ottoman administrative unit meaning \"Roman\"), which encompassed all the Orthodox subjects of the Empire.\nRussian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire.\nUp until 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State. In 1721 the first Russian Emperor, Peter I abolished completely the patriarchate and so the church effectively became a department of the government, ruled by a most holy synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. From 1721 until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church was essentially transformed into a governmental agency, a tool used to various degrees by the tsars in the imperial campaigns of Russification. The church was allowed by the State to levy taxes on the peasants. Therefore, the church, along with the imperial regime, to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and the other Russian revolutionaries.\nOrthodox churches under Communist rule.\nAfter the October revolution of 1917, part of the clergy of the Russian Church escaped the Bolshevik persecutions by fleeing abroad, where they founded an independent church in exile, reunified with the Russian one in 2007. The Orthodox Church clergy in Russia were seen as sympathetic with the cause of the White Army in the Civil War after the Revolution, and occasionally collaborated with it; Patriarch Tikhon's declared position was vehemently anti-Bolshevik in 1918. This may have further strengthened the Bolshevik animus against the church. The Soviet government confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools. Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by state interests, and most organised religions were never outlawed. Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals. In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.\nAfter Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. However, in 1959, Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.\nHowever, there is definitely marked return to Christian Orthodoxy in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion &amp; Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 percent to 72 percent, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) \u2013 a collaboration involving social scientists in about 50 countries.\nAlbania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist. In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organisation enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematisation (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialised institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).\nInterfaith relations.\nRelations with other Christians.\nEastern Orthodoxy represents the majority of Eastern Christianity. The Orthodox trace their bishops back to the apostles through apostolic succession, and continue the ancient Christian practices of veneration of saints, especially Mary as the Theotokos, prayers for the dead, and monasticism. Orthodoxy does not openly promote statuary, although it is not expressly condemned, instead limiting itself primarily to two-dimensional iconography. Western theological concepts of original sin, substitutionary atonement, predestination, purgatory and particular judgment are generally rejected by traditional Orthodox theologians.\nThe Orthodox believe themselves to be the one, holy, catholic and apostolic, that is, the true Church established by Jesus Christ and placed into the care of the apostles. As almost all other Christian groups are in indirect schism with the Orthodox Church, mostly as a result of the Great Schism with the Catholic Church at the turn of the second Christian millennium (before the schisms of the Protestant Reformation), these other groups are viewed as being Christian, but who, to varying degrees, lack full theological orthodoxy and orthopraxy. As such, all groups outside of the Orthodox Church are not seen as being members of the church proper, but rather separated brethren who have failed to retain the fullness of the Christian faith and theology. These deviations from orthodoxy have traditionally been called heresy, but due to the term's perceived pejorative connotations, some prefer the more technical designation of the term heterodoxy.\nIn 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical \"addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations\". This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC); as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox churches are members of the WCC and \"Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees\". Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism \"is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians.\"Hilarion Alfeyev, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on \"such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage\" and desire \"vigorous grassroots engagement\" between the two Christian communions on such issues.\nIn that regard, the differences between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralised Catholic Church and the decentralised confederation of Orthodox churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary. Even during a visit by Pope Francis to Georgia in October 2016, the leader of the Catholics was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians when he was holding mass in front of the practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.\nThe Oriental Orthodox churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century, and, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time; he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.\nIn 2019, the Primate of the OCU Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epiphanius stated that \"theoretically\" the Orthodox Church of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church could in the future unite into a united church around the Kyiv throne. In 2019, the Primate of the UGCC, Major Archbishop of Kyiv-Galicia Sviatoslav, stated that every effort should be made to restore the original unity of the Kyivan Church in its Orthodox and Catholic branches, saying that the restoration of Eucharistic communion between Rome and Constantinople is not a utopia.\nRelations with Islam.\nHistorically, the Orthodox Church and the non-Chalcedonians were among the first peoples to have contact with Islam, which conquered Roman/Byzantine Syria-Palestine and Egypt in the 7th century, and fought many battles against Islamic conquests. The Qur'an itself records its concurrent observations regarding the Roman world in Surah al-Rum. The main contact with Islam however, came after the conquest of the Seljuk Turks of Roman/Byzantine Anatolia in the 13th century.\nChristians who were under Islamic rule were denied equality of rights and were forced to pay the Jizya poll tax.\nIn Russia, Metropolitan Alfeyev stated belief in the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.\nPresent.\nThe various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another. Presently, there are two communions that reject each other and, in addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion, with all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox.\nThe main traditional historical communion is divided into two groups\u2014those who use the Revised Julian calendar for calculating fixed feasts and the Julian calendar for calculating movable feasts, and those who use the Julian calendar for all purposes. This second group may include congregations whose church allows them to choose, with the proviso that the choice remains in effect at least until the end of the church year. Also in communion are the Estonian and Finnish Orthodox churches who have a dispensation to use the Gregorian calendar for all purposes. Another group is referred to as True Orthodoxy (or Old Calendarists); they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. Similarly, another group called the Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow. As Eastern Orthodox Christianity is both collegial and local in structure, there is no single organisation called the \"True Orthodox Church\" nor is there official recognition among the \"True Orthodox\" as to who is properly included among them. While some unions have taken place even up to the present, the majority of True Orthodox are only secondarily concerned with reunion as opposed to preservation of Eastern Orthodox teaching.\nThe calendar question reflects the dispute between those who wish to use a calendar which is reformed yet not Gregorian (effectively gaining the perceived benefits of the Gregorian calendar without disregarding the three anathemas issued against it in the sixteenth century), something which opponents consider unnecessary and damaging to continuity, and those who wish to maintain the traditional ecclesiastical calendar (which happens to be based on the Julian calendar), arguing that such a modern change goes against 1900 years of church tradition and was in fact perpetrated without an ecumenical council, which would surely have rejected the idea.\nThe dispute has led to much acrimony, and sometimes even to violence. Following canonical precepts, some adherents of the old calendar have chosen to abstain from clerical inter-communion with those synods which have embraced the new calendar until the conflict is resolved. The monastic communities on Mount Athos have provided the strongest opposition to the new calendar, and to modernism in general, while still maintaining communion with their mother church.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has recently united with the Moscow Patriarchate; these two branches of the Russian Orthodox Church had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime (see Act of Canonical Communion).\nMain communion.\nThe Orthodox Church is a communion of 14 autocephalous (that is, administratively completely independent) regional churches, plus the Orthodox Church in America and recently the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. The Orthodox Church in America is recognised as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish and Czech-Slovak churches. In December 2018, representatives of two former non-canonical Ukraine Orthodox churches, along with two metropolitans of the canonical, but not autocephalous Ukraine Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate, proclaimed the formation of the unified Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 5 January 2019 it received the tomos of autocephaly (decree which defines the conditions of a church's independence) from the Ecumenical Patriarchate and thus received the place in the diptych.\nEach church has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its council of bishops or synod presided by a senior bishop\u2013its primate (or first hierarch). The primate may carry the honorary title of patriarch, metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or archbishop (in the Greek tradition).\nEach regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or, dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a tomos or other document of autonomy.\nBelow is a list of the 14 autocephalous Orthodox churches forming the main body of Orthodox Christianity, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled the \"first among equals\". Based on the definitions, the list is in the order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with some of their constituent autonomous churches and exarchates listed as well. The liturgical title of the primate is in italics.\nWithin the main body of Eastern Orthodoxy there are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status or legitimacy of the following Orthodox churches, particularly between those stemming from the Russian Orthodox or Constantinopolitan churches:\nTraditionalist groups.\nTrue Orthodox.\nTrue Orthodoxy has been separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s. The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and those churches which are in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same thing. They adhere to the use of the old Julian calendar since antiquity, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. True Orthodox writers have argued that in missionary areas such as the United States, Orthodox (SCOBA) membership numbers may be overstated, with the comparative number of True Orthodox as up to 15% of the Orthodox population, in Russia, it has been claimed by some clergy that up to a million Russians may be True Orthodox of different jurisdictions, though the total number is often cited at 1.7\u20132 million together.\nThere is no official communion of traditionalists. They often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality. The following is a list of the most prominent True Orthodox churches:\nOld Believers.\nOld Believers are groups which do not accept the liturgical reforms which were carried out within the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow in the 17th century. Although all of the groups of Old Believers emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reforms, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite their emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups which profess different interpretations of church tradition and they are often not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).\nChurches not in communion with other churches.\nChurches with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the 14 autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schismatic bodies such as the Abkhazian Orthodox Church or the Evangelical Orthodox Church."}
{"id": "10188", "revid": "912333775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10188", "title": "Eastern Orthodox", "text": ""}
{"id": "10189", "revid": "25233650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10189", "title": "Exobiology", "text": ""}
{"id": "10190", "revid": "41159175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10190", "title": "Eusebius of Nicomedia", "text": "Eusebius of Nicomedia (died 341) was an Arian priest and is claimed as one of the two men who might have baptized Constantine the Great (although the one who most likely baptized Constantine was Pope Saint Sylvester I.) He was a bishop of Berytus (modern-day Beirut) in Phoenicia. He was later made the bishop of Nicomedia, where the Imperial court resided. He lived finally in Constantinople from 338 up to his death.\nInfluence in the Imperial family and the Imperial court.\nDistantly related to the imperial family of Constantine, he owed his progression from a less significant Levantine bishopric to the most important episcopal see to his influence at court, and the great power he wielded in the church was derived from that source. In fact, during his time in the imperial court, the Eastern court and the major positions in the Eastern Church were held by Arians or Arian sympathizers. With the exception of a short period of eclipse, he enjoyed the confidence both of Constantine and Constantius II. He also served as the tutor of the later Emperor Julian the Apostate; and it was he who might have baptized Constantine the Great on May 22, 337 owing to his familial relationship with the emperor. Also during his time in the imperial court, Arianism became more popular with the royal family. It can be logically surmised that Eusebius had a huge hand in the acceptance of Arianism in the Constantinian household. The Arian influence grew so strong during his tenure in the imperial court that it was not until the end of the Constantinian dynasty and the appointment of Theodosius I that Arianism lost its influence in the empire.\nIt was of particular interest that Eusebius was nearly persecuted because of his close relationship to the Emperor Licinius while serving as bishop of Nicomedia during Licinius' reign.\nRelationship with Arius.\nLike Arius, he was a pupil of Lucian of Antioch, and it is probable that he held the same views as Arius from the very beginning; he was also one of Arius' most fervent supporters who encouraged Arius. It was also because of this relationship that he was the first person whom Arius contacted after the latter was excommunicated from Alexandria by Alexander I of Alexandria in 321. Apparently, Arius and Eusebius were close enough and Eusebius powerful enough that Arius was able to put his theology down in writing. He afterward modified his ideas somewhat, or perhaps he only yielded to the pressure of circumstances; but he was, if not the teacher, at all events the leader and organizer of the Arian council.\nAt the First Council of Nicaea, 325, he signed the Confession, but only after a long and desperate opposition in which he was said to \"subscribe with hand only, not heart\" according to ancient sources. It was a huge blow to the Arian party since it was surmised that the participants in the First Council of Nicaea were evenly split between non-Arians and Arians.\nHis defense of Arius angered the emperor, and a few months after the council\nhe was sent into exile due to his continual contacts with Arius and his followers. After the lapse of three years, he succeeded in regaining the imperial favor by convincing Constantine that Arius and his views do not conflict with the proclaimed Nicene Creed. After his return in 329 he brought the whole machinery of the state government into action in order to impose his views upon the Church.\nPolitical and religious career.\nIn complement to his theological interests, Eusebius was a skilled politician. Upon his return, he regained the lost ground resulted from the First Council of Nicaea, established alliances with other groups such as the Melitians and expelled many opponents.\nHe was described by modern historians as an \"ambitious intriguer\" and a \"consummate political player\". He was also described by ancient sources as a high-handed person who was also aggressive in his dealings.; he also used his allies to spy on his opponents.\nHe was able to dislodge and exile three key opponents who espoused the First Council of Nicaea: Eustathius of Antioch in 330, Athanasius of Alexandria in 335 and Marcellus of Ancyra in 336. This was no small feat since Athanasius was regarded as a \"man of God\" by Constantine, and both Eustathius and Athanasius held top positions in the church.\nAnother major feat was his appointment as the Patriarch of Constantinople by expelling Paul I of Constantinople; Paul would eventually return as Patriarch after Eusebius' death.\nEven outside the empire, Eusebius had great influence. He brought Ulfilas into the Arian priesthood and sent the latter to convert the heathen Goths.\nEusebius baptised Constantine the Great in his villa in Nicomedia, on May 22, 337 just before the death of the Emperor.\nDeath and aftermath.\nHe died at the height of his power in the year 341.\nHe was so influential that even after his death, Constantius II heeded his and Eudoxus of Constantinople's advice to attempt to convert the Roman Empire to Arianism by creating Arian Councils and official Arian Doctrines.\nIt was because of Eusebius that \"On the whole, Constantine and his successors made life pretty miserable for Church leaders committed to the Nicene decision and its Trinitarian formula.\"\nEusebius of Nicomedia is not to be confused with his contemporary Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of well-known early books of Church History.\nExternal links.\nCorrespondence of Eusebius of Nicomedia:\n "}
{"id": "10191", "revid": "1009245375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10191", "title": "Edo", "text": "Edo (), also romanized as Jedo, Yedo or Yeddo, is the former name of Tokyo.\nEdo, formerly a \"j\u014dkamachi\" (castle town) centered on Edo Castle located in Musashi Province, became the \"de facto\" capital of Japan from 1603 as the seat of the Tokugawa shogunate. Edo grew to become one of the largest cities in the world under the Tokugawa.\nAfter the Meiji Restoration in 1868 the Meiji government renamed Edo as \"Tokyo\" (, \"Eastern Capital\") and relocated the Emperor from the historic capital of Kyoto to the city. The era of Tokugawa rule in Japan from 1603 to 1868 is known eponymously as the Edo period.\nHistory.\nBefore Tokugawa.\nBefore the 10th century, there is no mention of Edo in historical records, but for a few settlements in the area. Edo first appears in the Azuma Kagami chronicles, that name for the area being probably used since the second half of the Heian period. Its development started in late 11th century with a branch of the called the , coming from the banks of the then-Iruma River, present day upstream of Arakawa river. A descendant of the head of the Chichibu clan settled in the area and took the name , likely based on the name used for the place, and founded the Edo clan. Shigetsugu built its fortified residence, probably around the tip of the Musashino terrace, which would become the Edo castle. Shigetsugu's son, , took the Taira's side against Minamoto no Yoritomo in 1180 but eventually surrendered to Minamoto and became a gokenin for the Kamakura shogunate. At the fall of the shogunate in the 14th century, the Edo clan took the side of the Southern court, and its influence declined during the Muromachi period.\nIn 1456, a vassal of the \u014cgigayatsu branch of the Uesugi clan, started to build a castle on the former fortified residence of the Edo clan and took the name \u014cta D\u014dkan. D\u014dkan lived in this castle until his assassination in 1486. Under D\u014dkan, with good water connections to Kamakura, Odawara and other parts of Kanto and the country, Edo expanded in a jokamachi, with the castle bordering a cove opening into Edo Bay (current Hibiya Park) and the town developing along the Hirakawa River that was flowing into the cove, as well as the stretch of land on the eastern side of the cove (roughly where current Tokyo Station is) called . Some priests and scholars fleeing Kyoto after the \u014cnin War came to Edo during that period.\nAfter the death of D\u014dkan, the castle became one of strongholds of the Uesugi clan, who fell to the Later H\u014dj\u014d clan at the battle of Takanawahara in 1524, during the expansion of their rule over the Kant\u014d area. When the H\u014dj\u014d clan was finally defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1590, the Kanto area was given to rule to Toyotomi's senior officer Tokugawa Ieyasu, who took his residence in Edo.\nTokugawa era.\nTokugawa Ieyasu emerged as the paramount warlord of the Sengoku period following his victory at the Battle of Sekigahara in October 1600. He formally founded the Tokugawa shogunate in 1603 and established his headquarters at Edo Castle. Edo became the center of political power and \"de facto\" capital of Japan, although the historic capital of Kyoto remained the \"de jure\" capital as the seat of the emperor. Edo transformed from a fishing village in Musashi Province in 1457 into the largest metropolis in the world with an estimated population of 1,000,000 by 1721.Edo was repeatedly and regularly devastated by fires, the Great fire of Meireki in 1657 being the most disastrous, with an estimated 100,000 victims and a vast portion of the city completely burnt. At the time, the population of Edo was around 300,000, and the impact of the fire was tremendous. The fire destroyed the dungeon of the Edo Castle, which was never rebuilt, and it influenced the urban planning afterwards to make the city more resilient with many empty areas to break spreading fires. Reconstruction efforts expanded the city east of the Sumida River, and some \"daimy\u014d\" residences were relocated to give more space to the city, especially in the direct vicinity of the shogun's residence, giving birth to a large green space beside the castle, present-day Fukiage gardens. During the Edo period, there were about 100 major fires mostly begun by accident and often quickly escalating and spreading through neighborhoods of wooden \"machiya\" which were heated with charcoal fires.\nIn 1868, the Tokugawa shogunate was overthrown in the Meiji Restoration by supporters of Emperor Meiji and his Imperial Court in Kyoto, ending Edo's status as the \"de facto\" capital of Japan. However, the new Meiji government soon renamed Edo to \"T\u014dky\u014d\" (\u6771\u4eac, \"Eastern Capital\") and the city became the formal capital of Japan when the emperor moved his residence to the city.\nUrbanism.\nThe shogunate undertook major works that drastically changed the topography of the area. The Hibiya cove facing the castle was soon filled after the arrival of Ieyasu, the Hirakawa river was diverted, and several protective moats and logistical canals were dug, to limit the risks of flooding. Landfill works on the bay began, with several areas reclaimed during the duration of the shogunate (notably the Tsukiji area). East of the city and of the Sumida River, a network of canals was dug.\nFresh water was a major issue, as direct wells would provide brackish water because of the location of the city over an estuary. The few fresh water ponds of the city were put to use, and a network of canals and underground wooden pipes bringing freshwater from the western side of the city and the Tama River was built. Some of this infrastructure was used until the 20th century.\nGeneral layout of the city.\nThe city was laid out as a castle town around Edo Castle, which was positioned at the tip of the Musashino terrace. The area in the immediate proximity of the castle consisted of samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences, whose families lived in Edo as part of the \"sankin-k\u014dtai\" system; the \"daimy\u014d\" made journeys in alternating years to Edo and used the residences for their entourages. The location of each residence was carefully attributed depending on their position as \"tozama\" or \"fudai\". It was this extensive organization of the city for the samurai class which defined the character of Edo, particularly in contrast to the two major cities of Kyoto and Osaka, neither of which were ruled by a \"daimy\u014d\" or had a significant samurai population. Kyoto's character was defined by the Imperial Court, the court nobles, its Buddhist temples and its history; Osaka was the country's commercial center, dominated by the \"ch\u014dnin\" or the merchant class. On the contrary, the samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences occupied up to 70% of the area of Edo. On the east and northeast sides of the castle lived the including the \"ch\u014dnin\" in a much more densely populated area than the samurai class area, organized in a series of gated communities called \"machi\" (\u753a, \"town\" or \"village\"). This area, Shitamachi (\u4e0b\u753a, \"lower town\" or \"lower towns\"), was the center of urban and merchant culture. Shomin also lived along the main roads leading in and out of the city. The Sumida River, then called the Great River (\u5927\u5ddd, \"\u014ckawa\"), ran on the eastern side of the city. The shogunate's official rice-storage warehouses and other official buildings were located here.\nThe marked the center of the city's commercial center and the starting point of the gokaid\u014d (thus making it the de facto \"center of the country\"). Fishermen, craftsmen and other producers and retailers operated here. Shippers managed ships known as \"tarubune\" to and from Osaka and other cities, bringing goods into the city or transferring them from sea routes to river barges or land routes.\nThe northeastern corner of the city was considered dangerous in the traditional \"onmy\u014dd\u014d\" cosmology and was protected from evil by a number of temples including Sens\u014d-ji and Kan'ei-ji, one of the two tutelary Bodaiji temples of the Tokugawa. A path and a canal, a short distance north of Sens\u014d-ji, extended west from the Sumida riverbank leading along the northern edge of the city to the Yoshiwara pleasure districts. Previously located near Ningy\u014dch\u014d, the districts were rebuilt in this more remote location after the great fire of Meireki. Danzaemon, the hereditary position head of \"eta,\" or outcasts, who performed \"unclean\" works in the city resided nearby.\nTemples and shrines occupied roughly 15% of the surface of the city, equivalent to the living areas of the townspeople, with however an average of 1/10th of its population. Temples and shrines were spread out over the city. Besides the large concentration in the northeast side to protect the city, the second Bodaiji of the Tokugawa, Z\u014dj\u014d-ji occupied a large area south of the castle.\nHousing.\nMilitary caste.\nThe samurai and \"daimy\u014ds\" residences varied dramatically in size depending on their status. Some daimy\u014ds could have several residences in Edo. The , was the main residence while the lord was in Edo and was used for official duties. It was not necessarily the largest of his residences, but the most convenient to commute to the castle. The , a bit further from the castle, could house the heir of the lord, his servants from his fief when he was in Edo for the sankin-kotai, or be a hiding residence if needed. The , if there was any, was on the outskirts of town, more of a pleasure retreat with gardens. The lower residence could also be used as a retreat for the lord if a fire had devastated the city. Some of the powerful \"daimy\u014ds\" residences occupied vast grounds of several dozens of hectares.\nShonin.\nIn a strict sense of the word, \"ch\u014dnin\" were only the townspeople who owned their residence, which was actually a minority. The \"shonin\" population mainly lived in semi-collective housings called , multi-rooms wooden dwellings, organized in enclosed , with communal facilities, such as wells connected to the city's fresh water distribution system, garbage collection area and communal bathrooms. A typical \"machi\" was of rectangular shape and could have a population of several hundreds.\nThe \"machi\" had curfew for the night with closing and guarded gates called opening on the in the \"machi\". Two floor buildings and larger shops, reserved to the higher-ranking members of the society, were facing the main street. A \"machi\" would typically follow a grid pattern and smaller streets, , were opening on the main street, also with (sometimes) two-floor buildings, shop on the first floor, living quarter on the second floor, for the more well-off residents. Very narrow streets accessible through small gates called , would enter deeper inside the \"machi\", where single floor \"nagayas\", the were located. Rentals and smaller rooms for lower ranked \"shonin\" were located in those back housings.\nEdo was nicknamed the , depicting the large number and diversity of those communities, but the actual number was closer to 1,700 by the 18th century.\nGovernment and administration.\nEdo's municipal government was under the responsibility of the \"r\u014dj\u016b\", the senior officials which oversaw the entire \"bakufu\" \u2013 the government of the Tokugawa shogunate. The administrative definition of Edo was called .\nThe \"Kanj\u014d-bugy\u014d\" (finance commissioners) were responsible for the financial matters of the shogunate, whereas the \"Jisha-Bugy\u014d\" handled matters related to shrines and temples. The were \"samurai\" (at the very beginning of the shogunate daimy\u014ds, later hatamoto) officials appointed to keep the order in the city, with the word designating both the heading magistrate, the magistrature and its organization. They were in charge of Edo's day-to-day administration, combining the role of police, judge and fire brigade. There were two offices, the South Machi-Bugy\u014d and the North Machi-Bugy\u014d, which had the same geographical jurisdiction in spite of their name but rotated roles on a monthly basis. Despite their extensive responsibilities, the teams of the Machi-Bugy\u014d were rather small, with 2 offices of 125 people each. The Machi-Bugy\u014d did not have jurisdiction over the samurai residential areas, which remained under the shogunate direct rule. The geographical jurisdiction of the Machi-Bugy\u014d did not exactly coincide with the Gofunai, creating some complexity on the handling on the matters of the city. \nThe Machi-bugy\u014d oversaw the numerous Machi where shonin lived through representatives called . Each Machi had a Machi leader called , who reported to a who himself was in charge of several Machis."}
{"id": "10192", "revid": "39446055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10192", "title": "Explosive", "text": "An explosive (or explosive material) is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound, and pressure. An explosive charge is a measured quantity of explosive material, which may either be composed solely of one ingredient or be a mixture containing at least two substances.\nThe potential energy stored in an explosive material may, for example, be\nExplosive materials may be categorized by the speed at which they expand. Materials that detonate (the front of the chemical reaction moves faster through the material than the speed of sound) are said to be \"high explosives\" and materials that deflagrate are said to be \"low explosives\". Explosives may also be categorized by their sensitivity. Sensitive materials that can be initiated by a relatively small amount of heat or pressure are primary explosives and materials that are relatively insensitive are secondary or tertiary explosives.\nA wide variety of chemicals can explode; a smaller number are manufactured specifically for the purpose of being used as explosives. The remainder are too dangerous, sensitive, toxic, expensive, unstable, or prone to decomposition or degradation over short time spans.\nIn contrast, some materials are merely combustible or flammable if they burn without exploding.\nThe distinction, however, is not razor-sharp. Certain materials\u2014dusts, powders, gases, or volatile organic liquids\u2014may be simply combustible or flammable under ordinary conditions, but become explosive in specific situations or forms, such as dispersed airborne clouds, or confinement or sudden release.\nHistory.\nAt its roots, the history of chemical explosives lies in the history of gunpowder. During the Tang Dynasty in the 9th century, Taoist Chinese alchemists were eagerly trying to find the elixir of immortality. In the process, they stumbled upon the explosive invention of gunpowder made from coal, saltpeter, and sulfur in 1044. Gunpowder was the first form of chemical explosives and by 1161, the Chinese were using explosives for the first time in warfare. The Chinese would incorporate explosives fired from bamboo or bronze tubes known as bamboo fire crackers. The Chinese also inserted live rats inside the bamboo fire crackers; when fired toward the enemy, the flaming rats created great psychological ramifications\u2014scaring enemy soldiers away and causing cavalry units to go wild.\nThough early thermal weapons, such as Greek fire, have existed since ancient times, the first widely used explosive in warfare and mining was black powder, invented in 9th century in China by Song Chinese alchemists. This material was sensitive to water, and it produced copious amounts of dark smoke. The first useful explosive stronger than black powder was nitroglycerin, developed in 1847. Since nitroglycerin is a liquid and highly unstable, it was replaced by nitrocellulose, trinitrotoluene (TNT) in 1863, smokeless powder, dynamite in 1867 and gelignite (the latter two being sophisticated stabilized preparations of nitroglycerin rather than chemical alternatives, both invented by Alfred Nobel). World War I saw the adoption of TNT in artillery shells. World War II saw an extensive use of new explosives (see List of explosives used during World War II). In turn, these have largely been replaced by more powerful explosives such as C-4 and PETN. However, C-4 and PETN react with metal and catch fire easily, yet unlike TNT, C-4 and PETN are waterproof and malleable.\nApplications.\nCommercial.\nThe largest commercial application of explosives is mining. Whether the mine is on the surface or is buried underground, the detonation or deflagration of either a high or low explosive in a confined space can be used to liberate a fairly specific sub-volume of a brittle material in a much larger volume of the same or similar material. The mining industry tends to use nitrate-based explosives such as emulsions of fuel oil and ammonium nitrate solutions, mixtures of ammonium nitrate prills (fertilizer pellets) and fuel oil (ANFO) and gelatinous suspensions or slurries of ammonium nitrate and combustible fuels.\nIn Materials Science and Engineering, explosives are used in cladding (explosion welding). A thin plate of some material is placed atop a thick layer of a different material, both layers typically of metal. Atop the thin layer is placed an explosive. At one end of the layer of explosive, the explosion is initiated. The two metallic layers are forced together at high speed and with great force. The explosion spreads from the initiation site throughout the explosive. Ideally, this produces a metallurgical bond between the two layers.\nAs the length of time the shock wave spends at any point is small, we can see mixing of the two metals and their surface chemistries, through some fraction of the depth, and they tend to be mixed in some way. It is possible that some fraction of the surface material from either layer eventually gets ejected when the end of material is reached. Hence, the mass of the now \"welded\" bilayer, may be less than the sum of the masses of the two initial layers.\nThere are applications where a shock wave, and electrostatics, can result in high velocity projectiles.\nTypes.\nChemical.\nAn explosion is a type of spontaneous chemical reaction that, once initiated, is driven by both a large exothermic change (great release of heat) and a large positive entropy change (great quantities of gases are released) in going from reactants to products, thereby constituting a thermodynamically favorable process in addition to one that propagates very rapidly. Thus, explosives are substances that contain a large amount of energy stored in chemical bonds. The energetic stability of the gaseous products and hence their generation comes from the formation of strongly bonded species like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and (di)nitrogen, which contain strong double and triple bonds having bond strengths of nearly 1 MJ/mole. Consequently, most commercial explosives are organic compounds containing -NO2, -ONO2 and -NHNO2 groups that, when detonated, release gases like the aforementioned (e.g., nitroglycerin, TNT, HMX, PETN, nitrocellulose).\nAn explosive is classified as a low or high explosive according to its rate of combustion: low explosives burn rapidly (or deflagrate), while high explosives detonate. While these definitions are distinct, the problem of precisely measuring rapid decomposition makes practical classification of explosives difficult.\nTraditional explosives mechanics is based on the shock-sensitive rapid oxidation of carbon and hydrogen to carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and water in the form of steam. Nitrates typically provide the required oxygen to burn the carbon and hydrogen fuel. High explosives tend to have the oxygen, carbon and hydrogen contained in one organic molecule, and less sensitive explosives like ANFO are combinations of fuel (carbon and hydrogen fuel oil) and ammonium nitrate. A sensitizer such as powdered aluminum may be added to an explosive to increase the energy of the detonation. Once detonated, the nitrogen portion of the explosive formulation emerges as nitrogen gas and toxic nitric oxides.\nDecomposition.\nThe chemical decomposition of an explosive may take years, days, hours, or a fraction of a second. The slower processes of decomposition take place in storage and are of interest only from a stability standpoint. Of more interest are the other two rapid forms besides decomposition: deflagration and detonation.\nDeflagration.\nIn deflagration, decomposition of the explosive material is propagated by a flame front which moves slowly through the explosive material at speeds less than the speed of sound within the substance (usually below 1000\u00a0m/s) in contrast to detonation, which occurs at speeds greater than the speed of sound. Deflagration is a characteristic of low explosive material.\nDetonation.\nThis term is used to describe an explosive phenomenon whereby the decomposition is propagated by an explosive shock wave traversing the explosive material at speeds greater than the speed of sound within the substance. The shock front is capable of passing through the high explosive material at supersonic speeds, typically thousands of metres per second.\nExotic.\nIn addition to chemical explosives, there are a number of more exotic explosive materials, and exotic methods of causing explosions. Examples include nuclear explosives, and abruptly heating a substance to a plasma state with a high-intensity laser or electric arc.\nLaser- and arc-heating are used in laser detonators, exploding-bridgewire detonators, and exploding foil initiators, where a shock wave and then detonation in conventional chemical explosive material is created by laser- or electric-arc heating. Laser and electric energy are not currently used in practice to generate most of the required energy, but only to initiate reactions.\nProperties.\nTo determine the suitability of an explosive substance for a particular use, its physical properties must first be known. The usefulness of an explosive can only be appreciated when the properties and the factors affecting them are fully understood. Some of the more important characteristics are listed below:\nSensitivity.\nSensitivity refers to the ease with which an explosive can be ignited or detonated, i.e., the amount and intensity of shock, friction, or heat that is required. When the term sensitivity is used, care must be taken to clarify what kind of sensitivity is under discussion. The relative sensitivity of a given explosive to impact may vary greatly from its sensitivity to friction or heat. Some of the test methods used to determine sensitivity relate to:\nSpecific explosives (usually but not always highly sensitive on one or more of the three above axes) may be idiosyncratically sensitive to such factors as pressure drop, acceleration, the presence of sharp edges or rough surfaces, incompatible materials, or even\u2014in rare cases\u2014nuclear or electromagnetic radiation. These factors present special hazards that may rule out any practical utility.\nSensitivity is an important consideration in selecting an explosive for a particular purpose. The explosive in an armor-piercing projectile must be relatively insensitive, or the shock of impact would cause it to detonate before it penetrated to the point desired. The explosive lenses around nuclear charges are also designed to be highly insensitive, to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.\nSensitivity to initiation.\nThe index of the capacity of an explosive to be initiated into detonation in a sustained manner. It is defined by the power of the detonator which is certain to prime the explosive to a sustained and continuous detonation. Reference is made to the Sellier-Bellot scale that consists of a series of 10 detonators, from n. 1 to n. 10, each of which corresponds to an increasing charge weight. In practice, most of the explosives on the market today are sensitive to an n. 8 detonator, where the charge corresponds to 2\u00a0grams of mercury fulminate.\nVelocity of detonation.\nThe velocity with which the reaction process propagates in the mass of the explosive. Most commercial mining explosives have detonation velocities ranging from 1800\u00a0m/s to 8000\u00a0m/s. Today, velocity of detonation can be measured with accuracy. Together with density it is an important element influencing the yield of the energy transmitted for both atmospheric over-pressure and ground acceleration. By definition, a \"low explosive\", such as black powder, or smokeless gunpowder has a burn rate of 171\u2013631\u00a0m/s. In contrast, a \"high explosive\", whether a primary, such as detonating cord, or a secondary, such as TNT or C-4 has a significantly higher burn rate.\nStability.\nStability is the ability of an explosive to be stored without deterioration.\nThe following factors affect the stability of an explosive:\nPower, performance, and strength.\nThe term power or performance as applied to an explosive refers to its ability to do work. In practice it is defined as the explosive's ability to accomplish what is intended in the way of energy delivery (i.e., fragment projection, air blast, high-velocity jet, underwater shock and bubble energy, etc.). Explosive power or performance is evaluated by a tailored series of tests to assess the material for its intended use. Of the tests listed below, cylinder expansion and air-blast tests are common to most testing programs, and the others support specific applications.\nBrisance.\nIn addition to strength, explosives display a second characteristic, which is their shattering effect or brisance (from the French meaning to \"break\"), which is distinguished and separate from their total work capacity. This characteristic is of practical importance in determining the effectiveness of an explosion in fragmenting shells, bomb casings, grenades, and the like. The rapidity with which an explosive reaches its peak pressure (power) is a measure of its brisance. Brisance values are primarily employed in France and Russia.\nThe sand crush test is commonly employed to determine the relative brisance in comparison to TNT. No test is capable of directly comparing the explosive properties of two or more compounds; it is important to examine the data from several such tests (sand crush, trauzl, and so forth) in order to gauge relative brisance. True values for comparison require field experiments.\nDensity.\nDensity of loading refers to the mass of an explosive per unit volume. Several methods of loading are available, including pellet loading, cast loading, and press loading, the choice being determined by the characteristics of the explosive. Dependent upon the method employed, an average density of the loaded charge can be obtained that is within 80\u201399% of the theoretical maximum density of the explosive. High load density can reduce sensitivity by making the mass more resistant to internal friction. However, if density is increased to the extent that individual crystals are crushed, the explosive may become more sensitive. Increased load density also permits the use of more explosive, thereby increasing the power of the warhead. It is possible to compress an explosive beyond a point of sensitivity, known also as \"dead-pressing\", in which the material is no longer capable of being reliably initiated, if at all.\nVolatility.\nVolatility is the readiness with which a substance vaporizes. Excessive volatility often results in the development of pressure within rounds of ammunition and separation of mixtures into their constituents. Volatility affects the chemical composition of the explosive such that a marked reduction in stability may occur, which results in an increase in the danger of handling.\nHygroscopicity and water resistance.\nThe introduction of water into an explosive is highly undesirable since it reduces the sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation of the explosive. Hygroscopicity is a measure of a material's moisture-absorbing tendencies. Moisture affects explosives adversely by acting as an inert material that absorbs heat when vaporized, and by acting as a solvent medium that can cause undesired chemical reactions. Sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation are reduced by inert materials that reduce the continuity of the explosive mass. When the moisture content evaporates during detonation, cooling occurs, which reduces the temperature of reaction. Stability is also affected by the presence of moisture since moisture promotes decomposition of the explosive and, in addition, causes corrosion of the explosive's metal container.\nExplosives considerably differ from one another as to their behavior in the presence of water. Gelatin dynamites containing nitroglycerine have a degree of water resistance. Explosives based on ammonium nitrate have little or no water resistance as ammonium nitrate is highly soluble in water and is hygroscopic.\nToxicity.\nMany explosives are toxic to some extent. Manufacturing inputs can also be organic compounds or hazardous materials that require special handing due to risks (such as carcinogens). The decomposition products, residual solids, or gases of some explosives can be toxic, whereas others are harmless, such as carbon dioxide and water.\nExamples of harmful by-products are:\n\"Green explosives\" seek to reduce environment and health impacts. An example of such is the lead-free primary explosive copper(I) 5-nitrotetrazolate, an alternative to lead azide. One variety of a green explosive is CDP explosives, whose synthesis does not involve any toxic ingredients, consumes carbon dioxide while detonating and does not release any nitric oxides into the atmosphere when used.\nExplosive train.\nExplosive material may be incorporated in the explosive train of a device or system. An example is a pyrotechnic lead igniting a booster, which causes the main charge to detonate.\nVolume of products of explosion.\nThe most widely used explosives are condensed liquids or solids converted to gaseous products by explosive chemical reactions and the energy released by those reactions. The gaseous products of complete reaction are typically carbon dioxide, steam, and nitrogen. Gaseous volumes computed by the ideal gas law tend to be too large at high pressures characteristic of explosions. Ultimate volume expansion may be estimated at three orders of magnitude, or one liter per gram of explosive. Explosives with an oxygen deficit will generate soot or gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen, which may react with surrounding materials such as atmospheric oxygen. Attempts to obtain more precise volume estimates must consider the possibility of such side reactions, condensation of steam, and aqueous solubility of gases like carbon dioxide.\nBy comparison, CDP detonation is based on the rapid reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon with the abundant release of energy. Rather than produce typical waste gases like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen and nitric oxides, CDP is different. Instead, the highly energetic reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon vaporizes and pressurizes excess dry ice at the wave front, which is the only gas released from the detonation. The velocity of detonation for CDP formulations can therefore be customized by adjusting the weight percentage of reducing agent and dry ice. CDP detonations produce a large amount of solid materials that can have great commercial value as an abrasive:\nExample \u2013 CDP Detonation Reaction with Magnesium: XCO2 + 2Mg \u2192 2MgO + C + (X-1)CO2\nThe products of detonation in this example are magnesium oxide, carbon in various phases including diamond, and vaporized excess carbon dioxide that was not consumed by the amount of magnesium in the explosive formulation.\nOxygen balance (OB% or \"\u03a9\").\nOxygen balance is an expression that is used to indicate the degree to which an explosive can be oxidized. If an explosive molecule contains just enough oxygen to convert all of its carbon to carbon dioxide, all of its hydrogen to water, and all of its metal to metal oxide with no excess, the molecule is said to have a zero oxygen balance. The molecule is said to have a positive oxygen balance if it contains more oxygen than is needed and a negative oxygen balance if it contains less oxygen than is needed. The sensitivity, strength, and brisance of an explosive are all somewhat dependent upon oxygen balance and tend to approach their maxima as oxygen balance approaches zero.\nOxygen balance applies to traditional explosives mechanics with the assumption that carbon is oxidized to carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide during detonation. In what seems like a paradox to an explosives expert, Cold Detonation Physics uses carbon in its most highly oxidized state as the source of oxygen in the form of carbon dioxide. Oxygen balance, therefore, either does not apply to a CDP formulation or must be calculated without including the carbon in the carbon dioxide.\nChemical composition.\nA chemical explosive may consist of either a chemically pure compound, such as nitroglycerin, or a mixture of a fuel and an oxidizer, such as black powder or grain dust and air.\nPure compounds.\nSome chemical compounds are unstable in that, when shocked, they react, possibly to the point of detonation. Each molecule of the compound dissociates into two or more new molecules (generally gases) with the release of energy.\nThe above compositions may describe most of the explosive material, but a practical explosive will often include small percentages of other substances. For example, dynamite is a mixture of highly sensitive nitroglycerin with sawdust, powdered silica, or most commonly diatomaceous earth, which act as stabilizers. Plastics and polymers may be added to bind powders of explosive compounds; waxes may be incorporated to make them safer to handle; aluminium powder may be introduced to increase total energy and blast effects. Explosive compounds are also often \"alloyed\": HMX or RDX powders may be mixed (typically by melt-casting) with TNT to form Octol or Cyclotol.\nOxidized fuel.\nAn oxidizer is a pure substance (molecule) that in a chemical reaction can contribute some atoms of one or more oxidizing elements, in which the fuel component of the explosive burns. On the simplest level, the oxidizer may itself be an oxidizing element, such as gaseous or liquid oxygen.\nAvailability and cost.\nThe availability and cost of explosives are determined by the availability of the raw materials and the cost, complexity, and safety of the manufacturing operations.\nClassification.\nBy sensitivity.\nPrimary.\nA primary explosive is an explosive that is extremely sensitive to stimuli such as impact, friction, heat, static electricity, or electromagnetic radiation. Some primary explosives are also known as contact explosives. A relatively small amount of energy is required for initiation. As a very general rule, primary explosives are considered to be those compounds that are more sensitive than PETN. As a practical measure, primary explosives are sufficiently sensitive that they can be reliably initiated with a blow from a hammer; however, PETN can also usually be initiated in this manner, so this is only a very broad guideline. Additionally, several compounds, such as nitrogen triiodide, are so sensitive that they cannot even be handled without detonating. Nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it can be reliably detonated by exposure to alpha radiation; it is the only explosive for which this is true. \nPrimary explosives are often used in detonators or to trigger larger charges of less sensitive secondary explosives. Primary explosives are commonly used in blasting caps and percussion caps to translate a physical shock signal. In other situations, different signals such as electrical or physical shock, or, in the case of laser detonation systems, light, are used to initiate an action, i.e., an explosion. A small quantity, usually milligrams, is sufficient to initiate a larger charge of explosive that is usually safer to handle.\nExamples of primary high explosives are:\nSecondary.\nA secondary explosive is less sensitive than a primary explosive and requires substantially more energy to be initiated. Because they are less sensitive, they are usable in a wider variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. Secondary explosives are used in larger quantities in an explosive train and are usually initiated by a smaller quantity of a primary explosive.\nExamples of secondary explosives include TNT and RDX.\nTertiary.\nTertiary explosives, also called blasting agents, are so insensitive to shock that they cannot be reliably detonated by practical quantities of primary explosive, and instead require an intermediate explosive booster of secondary explosive. These are often used for safety and the typically lower costs of material and handling. The largest consumers are large-scale mining and construction operations.\nMost tertiaries include a fuel and an oxidizer. ANFO can be a tertiary explosive if its reaction rate is slow.\nBy velocity.\nLow.\nLow explosives are compounds where the rate of decomposition proceeds through the material at less than the speed of sound (). The decomposition is propagated by a flame front (deflagration) which travels much more slowly through the explosive material than a shock wave of a high explosive. Under normal conditions, low explosives undergo deflagration at rates that vary from a few centimetres per second to approximately . It is possible for them to deflagrate very quickly, producing an effect similar to a detonation. This can happen under higher pressure (such as when gunpowder deflagrates inside the confined space of a bullet casing, accelerating the bullet to well beyond the speed of sound) or temperature.\nA low explosive is usually a mixture of a combustible substance and an oxidant that decomposes rapidly (deflagration); however, they burn more slowly than a high explosive, which has an extremely fast burn rate.\nLow explosives are normally employed as propellants. Included in this group are petroleum products such as propane and gasoline, gunpowder (including smokeless powder), and light pyrotechnics, such as flares and fireworks, but can replace high explosives in certain applications, see gas pressure blasting.\nHigh.\nHigh explosives (HE) are explosive materials that detonate, meaning that the explosive shock front passes through the material at a supersonic speed. High explosives detonate with explosive velocity of about . For instance, TNT has a detonation (burn) rate of approximately 5.8\u00a0km/s (19,000 feet per second), detonating cord of 6.7\u00a0km/s (22,000 feet per second), and C-4 about 8.5\u00a0km/s (29,000 feet per second). They are normally employed in mining, demolition, and military applications. They can be divided into two explosives classes differentiated by sensitivity: primary explosive and secondary explosive. The term \"high explosive\" is in contrast with the term \"low explosive\", which explodes (deflagrates) at a lower rate.\nCountless high-explosive compounds are chemically possible, but commercially and militarily important ones have included NG, TNT, TNX, RDX, HMX, PETN, TATB, and HNS.\nBy physical form.\nExplosives are often characterized by the physical form that the explosives are produced or used in. These use forms are commonly categorized as:\nShipping label classifications.\nShipping labels and tags may include both United Nations and national markings.\nUnited Nations markings include numbered Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) codes and alphabetic Compatibility Group codes. Though the two are related, they are separate and distinct. Any Compatibility Group designator can be assigned to any Hazard Class and Division. An example of this hybrid marking would be a consumer firework, which is labeled as 1.4G or 1.4S.\nExamples of national markings would include United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) codes.\nUnited Nations Organization (UNO) Hazard Class and Division (HC/D).\nThe Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) is a numeric designator within a hazard class indicating the character, predominance of associated hazards, and potential for causing personnel casualties and property damage. It is an internationally accepted system that communicates using the minimum amount of markings the primary hazard associated with a substance.\nListed below are the Divisions for Class 1 (Explosives):\nTo see an entire UNO Table, browse Paragraphs 3-8 and 3-9 of NAVSEA OP 5, Vol. 1, Chapter 3.\nClass 1 Compatibility Group.\nCompatibility Group codes are used to indicate storage compatibility for HC/D Class 1 (explosive) materials. Letters are used to designate 13 compatibility groups as follows.\nRegulation.\nThe legality of possessing or using explosives varies by jurisdiction. Various countries around the world have enacted explosives law and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, possess explosives or ingredients.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the civil and commercial use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik\" (explosives for civil use Act), in accordance with EU directive nr. 93/15/EEG (Dutch). The illegal use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet Wapens en Munitie\" (Weapons and Munition Act) (Dutch).\nUK.\nThe new Explosives Regulations 2014 (ER 2014) came into force on 1 October 2014 and defines \"explosive\" as:\nUnited States.\nDuring World War I, numerous laws were created to regulate war related industries and increase security within the United States. In 1917, the 65th United States Congress created many laws, including the \"Espionage Act of 1917\" and \"Explosives Act of 1917\".\nThe \"Explosives Act of 1917\" (session 1, chapter 83, ) was signed on 6 October 1917 and went into effect on 16 November 1917. The legal summary is \"An Act to prohibit the manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession in time of war of explosives, providing regulations for the safe manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession of the same, and for other purposes\". This was the first federal regulation of licensing explosives purchases. The act was deactivated after World War I ended.\nAfter the United States entered World War II, the Explosives Act of 1917 was reactivated. In 1947, the act was deactivated by President Truman.\nThe \"Organized Crime Control Act of 1970\" () transferred many explosives regulations to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) of the Department of Treasury. The bill became effective in 1971.\nCurrently, regulations are governed by Title 18 of the United States Code and Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations:\nState laws.\nMany states restrict the possession, sale, and use of explosives.\nMichigan Penal Code Chapter XXXIII Section 750.200 \u2013 750.212a\nExternal links.\nListed in Alphabetical Order:"}
{"id": "10193", "revid": "1012083958", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10193", "title": "Enter the Dragon", "text": "Enter the Dragon is a 1973 martial arts action film directed by Robert Clouse. The film stars Bruce Lee, John Saxon and Jim Kelly. It would be Lee's final completed film appearance before his death on 20 July 1973 at age 32. An American and Hong Kong co-production, it premiered in Los Angeles on 19 August 1973, one month after Lee's death. The film went on to gross an estimated worldwide (equivalent to more than adjusted for inflation), against a budget of $850,000. Having earned over times its budget, it is one of the most profitable films of all time, as well as being the most profitable martial arts film.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" is widely regarded as one of the greatest martial arts films of all time. In 2004, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Among the first films to combine martial arts action with spy film elements and the emerging blaxploitation genre, its success led to a series of similar productions combining the martial arts and blaxploitation genres. Its themes have also generated scholarly debate about how they reflect the changes taking place within post-colonial Asian societies following the end of World War II. \"Enter the Dragon\" is also considered one of the most influential action films of all time, with its success contributing to mainstream worldwide interest in the martial arts as well as inspiring numerous fictional works, including action films, television shows, fighting games, comic books, manga and anime.\nPlot.\nLee, a highly proficient Kung Fu (Wing Chun) martial artist and instructor from Hong Kong, is approached by Braithwaite, a British intelligence agent investigating the suspected crime lord Han. Lee is persuaded to attend a high-profile martial arts competition on Han's private island to gather evidence that will prove Han's involvement in drug trafficking and prostitution. Shortly before his departure, Lee also learns that the man responsible for his sister's death, O'Hara, is working as Han's bodyguard on the island. Also fighting in the competition are Roper, an indebted gambling addict, and fellow Vietnam war veteran Williams.\nAt the end of the first day, Han gives strict orders to the competitors not to leave their rooms. Lee makes contact with undercover operative Mei Ling and sneaks into Han's compound, looking for evidence. He is discovered by several guards, but manages to escape. The next morning, Han orders his giant enforcer Bolo to kill the guards in public for failing in their duties. After the execution, the competition resumes with Lee facing O'Hara. Lee beats O'Hara in humiliating fashion, then kills him after he attacks Lee with a pair of broken bottles. Han abruptly ends the day's competition after stating that O'Hara's treachery has disgraced them. Afterwards Han confronts Williams, who had also left his room the previous night to exercise. Han believes Williams to have knowledge of the intruder and after a destructive brawl, beats Williams to death with his iron prosthetic hand. Han then reveals his drug operation to Roper, hoping that he will join his organisation. He also implicitly threatens to imprison Roper, along with all the other martial artists who joined Han's tournaments in the past, if Roper refuses. Despite being initially intrigued, Roper refuses after learning of Williams's fate.\nLee sneaks out again that night and manages to send a message to Braithwaite, but he is captured after a prolonged battle with the guards. The next morning, Han arranges for Roper to fight Lee, but Roper refuses. As a punishment, Roper has to fight Bolo instead, whom he manages to overpower and beat after a grueling encounter. Enraged by the unexpected failure, Han commands his remaining men to kill Lee and Roper. Facing insurmountable odds, they are soon aided by the island's prisoners, who had been freed by Mei Ling. Han escapes and is pursued by Lee, who finally corners him in his museum. After a brutal fight, Han runs away into a hidden mirror room. The mirrors initially give Han an advantage, but Lee smashes all the room's mirrors to reveal Han's location and eventually kills him. Lee returns outside to the main battle, which is now over. Bruised and bloodied, Lee and Roper exchange a weary thumbs-up as the military finally arrives to take control of the island.\nProduction.\nDue to the success with his earlier films, Warner Bros began helping Bruce Lee with the film in 1972. They brought in producers Fred Weintraub and Paul Heller. The film was produced on a tight production budget of $850,000.\nWriting.\nThe screenplay title was originally named Blood and Steel. The story features Asian, White and Black heroic protagonists because the producers wanted a film that would appeal to the widest possible international audiences.\nThe scene in which Lee states that his style is \"Fighting Without Fighting\" is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden.\nCasting.\nJohn Saxon was a black belt in Judo and Shotokan Karate, who studied under grandmaster Hidetaka Nishiyama for three years. In negotiations, his agent told the film's producers that, if they wanted him, they would have to change the story so that the character of Williams would be killed, not Roper. They agreed and the script was changed.\nRockne Tarkington was originally cast in the role of Williams. However, he unexpectedly dropped out days before the production was about to begin in Hong Kong. Producer Fred Weintraub knew that karate world champion Jim Kelly had a training dojo in Crenshaw, Los Angeles, so he hastily arranged a meeting. Weintraub was immediately impressed, and Kelly was cast in the film. The success of Kelly's appearance launched his career as a star: after \"Enter the Dragon\", he signed a three-film deal with Warner Bros and went on to make several martial arts-themed blaxploitation films in the 1970s.\nJackie Chan has uncredited roles as various guards during the fights with Lee. However, Yuen Wah was Lee's main stunt double for the film, responsible for the gymnastics stunts such as the cartwheels and jumping back flip in the opening fight.\nSammo Hung also has a uncredited role in the opening fight scene against Lee at the start of the film.\nA rumor surrounding the making of \"Enter The Dragon\" claims that actor Bob Wall did not like Bruce Lee and that their fight scenes were not choreographed. However, Wall has denied this, stating he and Lee were actually good friends.\nFilming.\nThe film was shot on location in Hong Kong. All scenes were filmed without sound: dialogue and sound effects were added or dubbed in during post-production. Bruce Lee, after he had been goaded or challenged, fought several real fights with the film's extras and some set intruders during filming. The scenes of Han's Island were filmed at a residence known as Palm Villa near the coastal town of Stanley.\nSoundtrack.\nArgentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film's musical score. While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores, he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film's soundtrack. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies, earning a gold record.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was heavily advertised in the United States before its release. The budget for advertising was over . It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before, and was extremely comprehensive. To advertise the film, the studio offered free Karate classes, produced thousands of illustrated flip books, comic books, posters, photographs, and organised dozens of news releases, interviews, and public appearances for the stars. \"Esquire\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"Time\", and \"Newsweek\" all wrote stories on the film.\nBox office.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was one of the most successful films of 1973. Upon release in Hong Kong, the film grossed 3,307,536, which was huge business for the time, but less than Lee's previous 1972 films \"Fist of Fury\" and \"The Way of the Dragon\".\nIn North America, upon its limited release in August 1973 in four theaters in New York, the film entered the weekly box office charts at number 17 with a gross of $140,010 in 3 days. Upon its expansion the following week, it topped the charts for two weeks. Over the next four weeks, it remained in the top 10 while competing with other kung fu films, including \"Lady Kung Fu\", \"The Shanghai Killers\" and \"Deadly China Doll\" which held the top spot for one week each. In October, \"Enter the Dragon\" regained the top spot in its eighth week. It went on to gross from its initial North American release, making it the year's fourth highest-grossing film in the market. It was repeatedly re-released throughout the 1970s, with each re-release entering the top five in the box office charts. By 1982, the film had grossed a total of in the United States.\nIn Europe, the film initially monopolized several London West End cinemas for five weeks, before becoming a sellout success across Britain and the rest of Europe. In Spain, it was the seventh top-grossing film of 1973, selling 2,462,489 tickets. In France, it was one of the top five highest-grossing films of 1974 (above two other Lee films, \"Way of the Dragon\" at and \"Fist of Fury\" at ), with 4,444,582 ticket sales. In Germany, it was one of the top 10 highest-grossing films of 1974, with ticket sales. In Greece, the film earned in its first year of release.\nIn Japan, it was the second highest-grossing film of 1974, with distribution rental earnings of . In South Korea, the film sold 229,681 tickets in the capital city of Seoul. In India, the movie was released in 1975 and opened to full houses; in one Bombay theater, New Excelsior, it had a packed 32-week run. The film was also a success in Iran, where there was a theater which played it daily up until the 1979 Iranian Revolution.\nAgainst a tight budget of $850,000, the film grossed upon its initial 1973 worldwide release, making it one of the world's highest-grossing films of all time up until then. The film went on to have multiple re-releases around the world over the next several decades, significantly increasing its worldwide gross. The film went on to gross over by 1987, and more than by 1994. It was reportedly still among the all-time highest-grossing films in 1990. By 1998, it had grossed more than worldwide. By the 2010s, it had grossed an estimated worldwide total of (equivalent to approximately adjusted for inflation), having earned about times its original budget. The film's cost-to-profit ratio makes it one of the most commercially successful and profitable films of all time.\nCritical reception.\nUpon release, the film initially received mixed reviews from several critics, including a favorable review from \"Variety\" magazine. The film eventually went on to be well-received by most critics, and it is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1973. Critics have referred to \"Enter the Dragon\" as \"a low-rent James Bond thriller\", a \"remake of \"Dr. No\"\" with elements of Fu Manchu. J.C. Ma\u00e7ek III of PopMatters wrote, \"Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here, Bruce Lee, whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer. While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist, Lee proves to be a master of both fields.\"\nMany acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film. \"Variety\" described it as \"rich in the atmosphere\", the music score as \"a strong asset\" and the photography as \"interesting\". Additionally, The \"New York Times\" gave the film a rave review. The review stated \"The picture is expertly made and well-meshed; it moves like lightning and brims with color. It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand-hacker (not a gun in it) you will ever see anywhere.\"\nThe film currently holds a 94% approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes based on 49 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Badass to the max, \"Enter the Dragon\" is the ultimate kung-fu movie and fitting (if untimely) Bruce Lee swan song.\" In 2004, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was selected as the best martial arts film of all time, in a 2013 poll of \"The Guardian\" and \"The Observer\" critics. The film also ranks No. 474 on \"Empire\" magazine's 2008 list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\nHome video.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has remained one of the most popular martial arts films since its premiere and has been released numerous times worldwide on multiple home video formats. For almost three decades, many theatrical and home video versions were censored for violence, especially in the West. In the U.K. alone, at least four different versions have been released. Since 2001, the film has been released uncut in the U.K. and most other territories. Most DVDs and Blu-rays come with a wide range of extra features in the form of documentaries, interviews, etc. In 2013, a second, remastered HD transfer appeared on Blu-ray, billed as the \"40th Anniversary Edition\". In 2020, new 2K digital restorations of the theatrical cut and special edition were included as part of the \"Bruce Lee: His Greatest Hits\" box set by The Criterion Collection, which featured all of Lee's films, as well as \"Game of Death II\".\nLegacy.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has been cited as one of the most influential action films of all time. Sascha Matuszak of \"Vice\" called it the most influential kung fu film and said it \"is referenced in all manner of media, the plot line and characters continue to influence storytellers today, and the impact was particularly felt in the revolutionizing way the film portrayed African-Americans, Asians and traditional martial arts.\" Joel Stice of \"Uproxx\" called it \"arguably the most influential Kung Fu movie of all time.\" Kuan-Hsing Chen and Beng Huat Chua cited its fight scenes as influential as well as its \"hybrid form and its mode of address\" which pitches \"an elemental story of good against evil in such a spectacle-saturated way\".\nThe film has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", the satirical publication \"The Onion\", the Japanese game-show \"Takeshi's Castle\", and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film \"Kentucky Fried Movie\" (in its lengthy \"A Fistful of Yen\" sequence, basically a comedic, note for note remake of \"Dragon\") and also in the film \"Balls of Fury\". It was also parodied on television in \"That '70s Show\" during the episode \"Jackie Moves On\" with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role. Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in \"The Last Dragon\".\nThe \"Dragon Ball\" manga and anime franchise was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", which \"Dragon Ball\" creator Akira Toriyama was a fan of. The title \"Dragon Ball\" was also inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", and the piercing eyes of Goku's Super Saiyan transformation was based on Bruce Lee's paralysing glare.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was the foundation for fighting games. The \"Street Fighter\" video game franchise was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", with the gameplay centered around an international fighting tournament, and each character having a unique combination of ethnicity, nationality and fighting style. \"Street Fighter\" went on to set the template for all fighting games that followed. The little-known 1985 Nintendo arcade game \"Arm Wrestling\" contains voice leftovers from the film, as well as their original counterparts. The popular 1980s martial arts beat 'em up video game \"Double Dragon\" features two enemies named Roper and Williams, a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from \"Enter the Dragon\". The sequel includes opponents named Bolo and Oharra. The popular fighting game \"Mortal Kombat\" borrows multiple plot elements from \"Enter the Dragon\", as does its movie adaptation.\nAccording to Scott Mendelson of \"Forbes\", \"Enter the Dragon\" contains spy film elements similar to the \"James Bond\" franchise. \"Enter the Dragon\" was the most successful action-spy film to not be part of the \"James Bond\" franchise; \"Enter the Dragon\" had an initial global box office comparable to the \"James Bond\" films of that era, and a lifetime gross surpassing every \"James Bond\" film up until \"GoldenEye\" (1995). Mendelson argues that, had Lee lived after \"Enter the Dragon\" was released, the film had the potential to launch an action-spy film franchise starring Lee that could have rivalled the success of the \"James Bond\" franchise.\nLee's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring \"Almost Live!\" sketch \"Mind Your Manners with\" \"Billy Quan\".\nIn August 2007, the now-defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir-style thriller entitled \"Awaken the Dragon\" with Korean singer-actor Rain starring. It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee would work on the remake. In March 2015, Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake. In July 2018, David Leitch is in early talks to direct the remake."}
{"id": "10201", "revid": "15951685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10201", "title": "Exothermic process", "text": "In thermodynamics, the term exothermic process (exo- : \"outside\") describes a process or reaction that releases energy from the system to its surroundings, usually in the form of heat, but also in a form of light (e.g. a spark, flame, or flash), electricity (e.g. a battery), or sound (e.g. explosion heard when burning hydrogen). Its etymology stems from the Greek prefix \"\u03ad\u03be\u03c9\" (ex\u014d, which means \"outwards\") and the Greek word \"\u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03bc\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2\" (thermik\u03ccs, which means \"thermal\"). The term \"exothermic\" was first coined by Marcellin Berthelot. \nThe opposite of an exothermic process is an endothermic process, one that absorbs energy usually in the form of heat. The concept is frequently applied in the physical sciences to chemical reactions where chemical bond energy is converted to thermal energy (heat).\nTwo types of chemical reactions.\nExothermic and endothermic describe two types of chemical reactions or systems found in nature, as follows:\nExothermic.\nAfter an exothermic reaction, more energy has been released to the surroundings than was absorbed to initiate and maintain the reaction. An example would be the burning of a candle, wherein the sum of calories produced by combustion (found by looking at radiant heating of the surroundings and visible light produced, including the increase in temperature of the fuel (wax) itself, which oxygen converts to hot CO2 and water vapor) exceeds the number of calories absorbed initially in lighting the flame and in the flame maintaining itself (some energy is reabsorbed and used in melting, then vaporizing the wax, etc. but is far outstripped by the energy released in converting the relatively weak double bond of oxygen to the stronger bonds in CO2 and H2O).\nEndothermic.\nIn an endothermic reaction or system, energy is taken from the surroundings in the course of the reaction, usually driven by a favorable entropy increase in the system. An example of an endothermic reaction is a first aid cold pack, in which the reaction of two chemicals, or dissolving of one in another, requires calories from the surroundings, and the reaction cools the pouch and surroundings by absorbing heat from them. The production of wood by photosynthesis is an endothermic process: trees absorb radiant energy from the sun and use it in endothermic reactions such as taking apart CO2 and H2O and recombining the atoms to produce cellulose and other organic chemicals, as well as O2. The wood may later be burned in a fireplace, exothermically releasing the energy of O2 in the form of heat and light to their surroundings, e.g. to a home's interior.\nEnergy release.\nExothermic refers to a transformation in which a closed system releases energy (heat) to the surroundings, expressed by\nWhen the transformation occurs at constant pressure and without exchange of electrical energy, heat \"Q\" is equal to the enthalpy change, i.e.\nwhile at constant volume, according to the first law of thermodynamics it equals internal energy change, i.e.\nIn an adiabatic system (i.e. a system that does not exchange heat with the surroundings), an otherwise exothermic process results in an increase in temperature of the system.\nIn exothermic chemical reactions, the heat that is released by the reaction takes the form of electromagnetic energy or kinetic energy of molecules. The transition of electrons from one quantum energy level to another causes light to be released. This light is equivalent in energy to the stabilization energy of the energy for the chemical reaction, i.e. the bond energy. This light that is released can be absorbed by other molecules in solution to give rise to molecular translations and rotations, which gives rise to the classical understanding of heat. In an exothermic reaction, the energy needed to start the reaction is less than the energy that is subsequently released, so there is a net release of energy.\nExamples.\nSome examples of exothermic processes are:\nImplications for chemical reactions.\nChemical exothermic reactions are generally more spontaneous than their counterparts, endothermic reactions. \nIn a thermochemical reaction that is exothermic, the heat may be listed among the products of the reaction.\nContrast between thermodynamic and biological terminology.\nBecause of historical accident, students encounter a source of possible confusion between the terminology of physics and biology. Whereas the thermodynamic terms \"exothermic\" and \"endothermic\" respectively refer to processes that give out heat energy and processes that absorb heat energy, in biology the sense is effectively inverted. The metabolic terms \"ectothermic\" and \"endothermic\" respectively refer to organisms that rely largely on external heat to achieve a full working temperature, and to organisms that produce heat from within as a major factor in controlling their bodily temperature."}
{"id": "10204", "revid": "20658814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10204", "title": "Elihu Yale", "text": "Elihu Yale (5 April 1649 \u2013 8 July 1721) was a British-American merchant and a slave trader, President of the East India Company settlement in Fort St. George, at Madras, and a benefactor of the Yale College in his honor.\nLife.\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, to David Yale (1613\u20131690) and Ursula Knight, he was the grandson of Ann Lloyd (1591\u20131659), who after the death of her first husband, Thomas Yale (1587\u20131619) in Chester, Cheshire, England, married Governor Theophilus Eaton (1590\u20131658) of New Haven Colony.\nThe Yale family left Boston and returned to England when Elihu was three years old and he grew up and went to school in London.\nFor 20 years Yale served the Honourable East India Company. In 1684 he became the first president of Fort St. George, the company's post at Madras (now Chennai), India. He succeeded a number of agents from Andrew Cogan to William Gyfford. Yale was instrumental in the development of the Government General Hospital, housed at Fort St. George.\nYale amassed a fortune while working for the company, largely through secret contracts with Madras merchants, against the East India Company's directive. By 1692, his repeated flouting of East India Company regulations and growing embarrassment at his illegal profiteering resulted in his being relieved of the post of governor.\nYale returned to Britain in 1699. He spent the rest of his life at Plas Grono, a mansion bought by his father, or at his house in London, spending liberally the considerable wealth he had accumulated.\nYale's ancestry can be traced back to the family estate at Plas yn I\u00e2l near the village of Llandegla, Wales. \nTenure as President of Madras.\nElihu Yale was re-appointed as president of the administration of Fort St George on 26 July 1687. He then implemented an order dated 14 January 1685 which required the English at Fort St George to make all attempts at procurement of the town of St Thome on lease. To this effect, Chinna Venkatadri was sent to negotiate with the local governor on 4 August 1687. The mission was successful and Chinna Venkatadri assumed sovereignty over St Thome for a period of three years. Notwithstanding the vehement protests of the Portuguese inhabitants of St Thome, the English gained absolute control over all lands up to St Thomas Mount for a period of three years.\nIn September 1688, the Mughal Emperor Aurangazeb took Golconda after a prolonged battle. The Mughals took Sultan of Golconda prisoner and annexed the state. The newly designated Mughal Subedar of the province immediately sent a letter to the British authorities at Fort St George demanding that the English at Madras acknowledge the overlordship of the Mughal Emperor. The English complied willingly. Aurangazeb guaranteed the independence of Madras, but in return demanded that the English supply troops in the event of a war against the Marathas. It was around this time that Yale's three-year-old son David Yale died and was interred in the Madras cemetery.\nThe records of this period mention a flourishing slave trade in Madras. After English merchants began to kidnap young children and deport them to distant parts of the world, the administration of Fort St George stepped in and introduced laws to curb the practice. On February 2, 1688, Elihu Yale decreed that henceforth, slaves should be examined by the judges of the choultry before being transported. Transportation of young children, in particular, was made unlawful. Beyond this, the nature of Yale's involvement in the slave trade remains disputed. A blog post by a Yale graduate student suggests that he permitted a law that at least ten slaves should be carried on every ship bound for Europe, and notes that in his capacity as judge he also on several occasions sentenced so-called \"black criminals\" to whipping and enslavement. On the other hand, according to Steven Pincus, a former Yale professor of history and current professor at the University of Chicago, Yale was never a slave trader and never owned slaves \u2014 and in fact opposed the slave trade during his time as governor of Madras.\nDuring Yale's presidency, a plan for setting up a corporation in Madras was conceived by Josiah Child, the Governor of the East India Company, in a letter addressed to the factors at Madras on 28 September 1687. Three months later, Josiah Child and his deputy had an audience with James II, and as per the ensuing discussions, a Charter was issued by the king on 30 December 1687 which established the Corporation of Madras. The charter came into effect on 29 September 1688, and a Corporation was established comprising a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, 60-100 Burgesses and sergeants. Nathaniel Higginson, who was then the second member of the Council of Fort St George took office as the Mayor of Madras.\nIn August 1689, a French fleet appeared near the coast of Ceylon compelling the Governor of Pulicat Lawrence Pitt who was on high seas to seek protection within the bastions of Fort St George. Throughout the year 1690, French naval ships from Pondicherry ravaged the coast in order to drive the English and the Dutch out of the East Indies but were unsuccessful. They eventually withdrew from their enterprise when faced with heavy losses. It was also during this time that the English purchased the town of Tegnapatnam from the Marathas.\nMarriage.\nYale married Catherine Hynmers, a widow, in 1680. The wedding took place at St. Mary's Church, at Fort St. George, where Yale was a vestryman and treasurer. The marriage was the first registered at the church.\nScandal.\nAfter Jacques de Paiva's death in 1687, Elihu Yale fell in love with his widow Hieronima de Paiva and brought her to live with him, causing quite a scandal within Madras\u2019 colonial society. Elihu Yale and Hieromima de Paiva had a son. The son died in South Africa.\nAccusations of corruption and removal.\nAs president of Fort St. George, Yale purchased territory for private purposes with East India Company funds, including a fort at Devanampattinam (now Cuddalore). Yale imposed high taxes for the maintenance of the colonial garrison and town, resulting in an unpopular regime and several revolts by Indians, brutally quelled by garrison soldiers. Yale was also notorious for arresting and trying Indians on his own private authority, including the hanging of a stable boy who had absconded with a Company horse.\nCharges of corruption were brought against Elihu Yale in the last years of his Presidency. He was eventually removed in 1692 and replaced with Nathaniel Higginson as the President of Madras.\nDeath.\nYale died on 8 July 1721 in London, but was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St Giles\u2019 Church, Wales. His tomb is inscribed with these lines:\nIn Boston, Massachusetts, a tablet to Yale was erected in 1927 at Scollay Square, near the site of Yale's birth. Yale president Arthur Twining Hadley penned the inscription, which reads: \"On Pemberton Hill, 255 Feet North of This Spot, Was Born on April Fifth 1649 Elihu Yale, Governor of Madras, Whose Permanent Memorial in His Native Land is the College That Bears His Name.\"\nYale University.\nIn 1718, Cotton Mather contacted Yale and asked for his help. Mather represented a small institution of learning that had been founded in 1701 in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, as the Collegiate School of Connecticut, which needed money for a new building. Yale sent Mather 417 books, a portrait of King George I, and nine bales of goods. These last were sold by the school for \u00a3800 pound sterling. In gratitude, officials named the new building Yale; eventually the entire institution became Yale College.\nYale was also a vestryman and treasurer of St. Mary's Church at Fort St. George. On 6 October 1968, the 250th anniversary of the naming of Yale College for Elihu Yale, the classmates of Chester Bowles, then the American ambassador to India and a graduate of Yale (1924), donated money for lasting improvements to the church and erected a plaque to commemorate the occasion. In 1970 a portrait of him, \"Elihu Yale seated at table with the Second Duke of Devonshire and Lord James Cavendish\" was donated to the Yale Center for British Art from Chatsworth House.\nOn 5 April 1999, Yale University recognized the 350th anniversary of Yale's birthday. An article that year in \"American Heritage\" magazine rated Elihu Yale the \"most overrated philanthropist\" in American history, arguing that the college that became Yale University was successful largely because of the generosity of a man named Jeremiah Dummer, but that the trustees of the school did not want it known by the name \"Dummer College\".\nIn her article for \"The Atlantic\" about Skull and Bones, a secret society at Yale University, Alexandra Robbins alleges that Yale's headstone was stolen years ago from its proper setting in Wrexham. She further alleges that the tombstone is now displayed in a glass case in a room with purple walls.\nControversy.\nThere was recent controversy about Yale's activities during the era of slave trade and a group called #CancelYale demands that Elihu Yale's name be removed from Yale University. \nYale University \"...relied on slave-trading money for its first scholarships, endowed professorship and library endowment.\"\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "10207", "revid": "4995299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10207", "title": "\u00c9mile Baudot", "text": "Jean-Maurice-\u00c9mile Baudot (; 11 September 1845 \u2013 28 March 1903), French telegraph engineer and inventor of the first means of digital communication Baudot code, was one of the pioneers of telecommunications. He invented a multiplexed printing telegraph system that used his code and allowed multiple transmissions over a single line. The baud unit was named after him.\nEarly life.\nBaudot was born in Magneux, Haute-Marne, France, the son of farmer Pierre Emile Baudot, who later became the mayor of Magneux. His only formal education was at his local primary school, after which he carried out agricultural work on his father's farm before joining the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration as an apprentice operator in 1869.\nThe telegraph service trained him in the Morse telegraph and also sent him on a four-month course of instruction on the Hughes printing telegraph system, which was later to inspire his own system.\nAfter serving briefly during the Franco-Prussian War, he returned to civilian duties in Paris in 1872.\nTelegraphy.\nThe Telegraph Service encouraged Baudot to develop\u2014on his own time\u2014a system for time-multiplexing several telegraph messages using Hughes teleprinters. He realised that with most printing telegraphs of the period the line is idle for most of the time, apart from the brief intervals when a character is transmitted. Baudot devised one of the first applications of time-division multiplexing in telegraphy. Using synchronized clockwork-powered switches at the transmitting and receiving ends, he was able to transmit five messages simultaneously; the system was officially adopted by the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration five years later.\nBaudot invented his telegraph code in 1870 and patented it in 1874. It was a 5-bit code, with equal on and off intervals, which allowed telegraph transmission of the Roman alphabet, punctuation and control signals. By 1874 or 1875 (various sources give both dates) he had also perfected the electromechanical hardware to transmit his code. His inventions were based on the printing mechanism from Hughes' instrument, a distributor invented by Bernard Meyer in 1871, and the five-unit code devised by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber. Baudot combined these, together with original ideas of his own, to produce a complete multiplex system.\nBaudot system.\nOn 17 June 1874 Baudot patented his first printing telegraph (Patent no. 103,898 \"Syst\u00e8me de t\u00e9l\u00e9graphie rapide\"), in which the signals were translated automatically into typographic characters. Baudot's hardware had three main parts: the keyboard, the distributor, and a paper tape.\nEach operator - there were as many as four - was allocated a single sector. The keyboard had just five piano type keys, operated with two fingers of the left hand and three fingers of the right hand. The five unit code was designed to be easy to remember. Once the keys had been pressed they were locked down until the contacts again passed over the sector connected to that particular keyboard, when the keyboard was unlocked ready for the next character to be entered, with an audible click (known as the \"cadence signal\") to warn the operator. Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute.\nThe receiver was also connected to the distributor. The signals from the telegraph line were temporarily stored on a set of five electromagnets, before being decoded to print the corresponding character on paper tape.\nAccurate operation of this system depended on the distributor at the transmitting end keeping in synchronization with the one at the receiving end and operators only sending characters when the contacts passed over their allocated sector. This could be achieved at a speed of 30 wpm by strictly observing the \"cadence\" of rhythm of the system when the distributor gave the operator the use of the line.\nFirst use.\nThe Baudot system was accepted by the French Telegraph Administration in 1875, with the first online tests of his system occurring between Paris and Bordeaux on 12 November 1877. At the end of 1877, the Paris-Rome line, which was about , began operating a duplex Baudot.\nThe Baudot apparatus was shown at the Paris Exposition Universelle (1878) and won him the Exposition's gold medal, as well as bringing his system to worldwide notice.\nLater career.\nAfter the first success of his system, Baudot was promoted to Controller in 1880, and was named Inspector-Engineer in 1882.\nIn July 1887 he conducted successful tests on the Atlantic telegraph cable between Weston-super-Mare and Waterville, Nova Scotia operated by the Commercial Company, with a double Baudot installed in duplex, the Baudot transmitters and receivers substituted for the recorder.\nOn 8 August 1890 he established communications between Paris, Vannes, and Lorient over a single wire. On 3 January 1894 he installed a triplex apparatus on the telegraph between Paris and Bordeaux that had previously been operating with some difficulty on the Hughes telegraph system. On 27 April 1894 he established communications between the Paris stock exchange and the Milan stock exchange, again over a single wire, using his new invention, the retransmitter.\nIn 1897 the Baudot system was improved by switching to punched tape, which was prepared offline like the Morse tape used with the Wheatstone and Creed systems. A tape reader, controlled by the Baudot distributor, then replaced the manual keyboard. The tape had five rows of holes for the code, with a sixth row of smaller holes for transporting the tape through the reader mechanism. Baudot\u2019s code was later standardised as International Telegraph Alphabet Number One.\nBaudot received little help from the French Telegraph Administration for his system, and often had to fund his own research, even having to sell the gold medal awarded by the 1878 Exposition Universelle in 1880.\nThe Baudot telegraph system was employed progressively in France, and then was adopted in other countries, Italy being the first to introduce it, in its inland service, in 1887. The Netherlands followed in 1895, Switzerland in 1896, and Austria and Brazil in 1897. The British Post Office adopted it for a simplex circuit between London and Paris during 1897, then used it for more general purposes from 1898. In 1900 it was adopted by Germany, by Russia in 1904, the British West Indies in 1905, Spain in 1906, Belgium in 1909, Argentina in 1912, and Romania in 1913.\nFinal years.\nBaudot married Marie Josephine Adelaide Langrognet on 15 January 1890. She died only three months later, on 9 April 1890.\nSoon after starting work with the telegraph service, Baudot began to suffer physical discomfort and was frequently absent from work for this reason, for as long as a month on one occasion. His condition affected him for the rest of his life, until he died on 28 March 1903, at Sceaux, Hauts-de-Seine, near Paris, at the age of 57.\nMimault patent suit.\nIn 1874, French telegraph operator Louis Victor Mimault patented a telegraph system using five separate lines to transmit. After his patent was rejected by the Telegraph Administration, Mimault modified his device to incorporate features from the Meyer telegraph and obtained a new patent which was also rejected. In the meantime, Baudot had patented his prototype telegraph a few weeks earlier.\nMimault claimed priority of invention over Baudot and brought a patent suit against him in 1877. The Tribunal Civil de la Seine, which reviewed testimony from three experts unconnected with the Telegraph Administration, found in favor of Mimault and accorded him priority of invention of the Baudot code and ruled that Baudot's patents were simply improvements of Mimault's. Neither inventor was satisfied with this judgment, which was eventually rescinded with Mimault being ordered to pay all legal costs.\nMimault became unnerved because of the decision, and after an incident where he shot at and wounded two students of the \u00c9cole Polytechnique (charges for which were dropped), he demanded a special act to prolong the duration of his patents, 100,000 Francs, and election to the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. A commission directed by Jules Raynaud (head of telegraph research) rejected his demands. Upon hearing the decision, Mimault shot and killed Raynaud, and was sentenced to 10 years forced labour and 20 years of exile."}
{"id": "10210", "revid": "6263999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10210", "title": "Emotion theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "10211", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10211", "title": "Economic security", "text": "Economic security or financial security is the condition of having stable income or other resources to support a standard of living now and in the foreseeable future. It includes:\nFinancial security more often refers to individual and family money management and savings. Economic security tends to include the broader effect of a society's production levels and monetary support for non-working citizens.\nComponents of individual economic security.\nIn the United States, children's economic security is indicated by the income level and employment security of their families or organizations. Economic security of people over 50 years old is based on Social Security benefits, pensions and savings, earnings and employment, and health insurance coverage.\nIn 1972, the state legislature of Arizona formed a Department of Economic Security with a mission to promote \"the safety, well-being, and self sufficiency of children, adults, and families\". This department combines state government activities previously managed by the Employment Security Commission, the State Department of Public Welfare, the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the State Office of Economic Opportunity, the Apprenticeship Council, the State Office of Manpower Planning, and the State Department of Mental Retardation. The State Department of Mental Retardation (renamed the Division of Developmental Disabilities, House Bill 2213) joined the Department in 1974 . The purpose in creating the Department was to provide an integration of direct services to people in such a way as to reduce duplication of administrative efforts, services and expenditures. Family Connections became a part of the Department in January 2007.\nThe Minnesota Department of Economic Security was formed in 1977 from the departments of Employment Services and Vocational Rehabilitation, the Governor's Manpower Office, and the Economic Opportunity Office, which administered anti-poverty programs. In 1985, State Services for the Blind was included in this department. In 2003, the Minnesota Department of Economic Security and Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development were merged to form The Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development.\nEconomic security of countries.\nEconomic security, in the context of politics and international relations, is the ability of a nation-state to follow its choice of policies to develop the national economy in the manner desired. Historically, conquest of nations have made conquerors rich through plunder, access to new resources and enlarged trade through controlling of the conquered nations'economy. In today's complex system of international trade, characterised by multi-national agreements, mutual inter-dependence and availability of natural resources etc., economic security today forms, arguably, as important a part of national security as military policy.\nEconomic security has been proposed as a key determinant of international relations, particularly in the geopolitics of petroleum in American foreign policy after September 11, 2001.\nIn Canada, threats to the country's overall economic security are considered economic espionage, which is \"illegal, clandestine or coercive activity by a foreign government in order to gain unauthorized access to economic intelligence, such as proprietary information or technology, for economic advantage.\"\nOther.\nIt is widely believed that there is a tradeoff between economic security and economic opportunity."}
{"id": "10212", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10212", "title": "Evers, Charles", "text": ""}
{"id": "10213", "revid": "690442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10213", "title": "Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution", "text": "Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE) (also known as Enhanced GPRS (EGPRS), IMT Single Carrier (IMT-SC), or Enhanced Data rates for Global Evolution) is a digital mobile phone technology that allows improved data transmission rates as a backward-compatible extension of GSM. EDGE is considered a pre-3G radio technology and is part of ITU's 3G definition. EDGE was deployed on GSM networks beginning in 2003 \u2013 initially by Cingular (now AT&amp;T) in the United States.\nEDGE is standardized also by 3GPP as part of the GSM family. A variant, so called Compact-EDGE, was developed for use in a portion of Digital AMPS network spectrum.\nThrough the introduction of sophisticated methods of coding and transmitting data, EDGE delivers higher bit-rates per radio channel, resulting in a threefold increase in capacity and performance compared with an ordinary GSM/GPRS connection.\nEDGE can be used for any packet switched application, such as an Internet connection.\nEvolved EDGE continues in Release 7 of the 3GPP standard providing reduced latency and more than doubled performance e.g. to complement High-Speed Packet Access (HSPA). Peak bit-rates of up to 1 Mbit/s and typical bit-rates of 400 kbit/s can be expected.\nTechnology.\nEDGE/EGPRS is implemented as a bolt-on enhancement for 2.5G GSM/GPRS networks, making it easier for existing GSM carriers to upgrade to it. EDGE is a superset to GPRS and can function on any network with GPRS deployed on it, provided the carrier implements the necessary upgrade.\nEDGE requires no hardware or software changes to be made in GSM core networks. EDGE-compatible transceiver units must be installed and the base station subsystem needs to be upgraded to support EDGE. If the operator already has this in place, which is often the case today, the network can be upgraded to EDGE by activating an optional software feature. Today EDGE is supported by all major chip vendors for both GSM and WCDMA/HSPA.\nTransmission techniques.\nIn addition to Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK), EDGE uses higher-order PSK/8 phase shift keying (8PSK) for the upper five of its nine modulation and coding schemes. EDGE produces a 3-bit word for every change in carrier phase. This effectively triples the gross data rate offered by GSM. EDGE, like GPRS, uses a rate adaptation algorithm that adapts the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) according to the quality of the radio channel, and thus the bit rate and robustness of data transmission. It introduces a new technology not found in GPRS, Incremental Redundancy, which, instead of retransmitting disturbed packets, sends more redundancy information to be combined in the receiver. This increases the probability of correct decoding.\nEDGE can carry a bandwidth up to 236\u00a0kbit/s (with end-to-end latency of less than 150\u00a0ms) for 4 timeslots (theoretical maximum is 473.6\u00a0kbit/s for 8 timeslots) in packet mode. This means it can handle four times as much traffic as standard GPRS. EDGE meets the International Telecommunications Union's requirement for a 3G network, and has been accepted by the ITU as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards. It also enhances the circuit data mode called HSCSD, increasing the data rate of this service.\nEDGE modulation and coding scheme (MCS).\nThe channel encoding process in GPRS as well as EGPRS/EDGE consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. In GPRS, the Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In GPRS Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In GPRS Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied.\nIn EGPRS/EDGE, the Modulation and Coding Schemes MCS-1 to MCS-9 take the place of the Coding Schemes of GPRS, and additionally specify which modulation scheme is used, GMSK or 8PSK. MCS-1 through MCS-4 use GMSK and have performance similar (but not equal) to GPRS, while MCS-5 through MCS-9 use 8PSK. In all EGPRS Modulation and Coding Schemes, a convolutional code of rate 1/3 is used, and puncturing is used to achieve the desired code rate. In contrast to GPRS, the Radio Link Control (RLC) and Media Access Control (MAC) headers and the payload data are coded separately in EGPRS. The headers are coded more robustly than the data.\nEvolved EDGE.\nEvolved EDGE, also called EDGE Evolution, is a bolt-on extension to the GSM mobile telephony standard, which improves on EDGE in a number of ways. Latencies are reduced by lowering the Transmission Time Interval by half (from 20 ms to 10 ms). Bit rates are increased up to 1 Mbit/s peak bandwidth and latencies down to 80 ms using dual carrier, higher symbol rate and higher-order modulation (32QAM and 16QAM instead of 8PSK), and turbo codes to improve error correction. This results in real world downlink speeds of up to 600kbit/s. Further the signal quality is improved using dual antennas improving average bit-rates and spectrum efficiency.\nThe main intention of increasing the existing EDGE throughput is that many operators would like to upgrade their existing infrastructure rather than invest on new network infrastructure. Mobile operators have invested billions in GSM networks, many of which are already capable of supporting EDGE data speeds up to 236.8 kbit/s. With a software upgrade and a new device compliant with Evolved EDGE (like an Evolved EDGE smartphone) for the user, these data rates can be boosted to speeds approaching 1 Mbit/s (i.e. 98.6 kbit/s per timeslot for 32QAM). Many service providers may not invest in a completely new technology like 3G networks.\nConsiderable research and development happened throughout the world for this new technology. A successful trial by Nokia Siemens and \"one of China's leading operators\" has been achieved in a live environment. With the introduction for more advanced wireless technologies like UMTS and LTE, which also focus on a network coverage layer on low frequencies and the upcoming phase-out and shutdown of 2G mobile networks, it is very unlikely that Evolved EDGE will ever see any deployment on live networks. Up to now (as of 2016) there are no commercial networks which support the Evolved EDGE standard (3GPP Rel-7).\nTechnology.\nReduced Latency.\nWith Evolved EDGE come three major features designed to reduce latency over the air interface.\nIn EDGE, a single RLC data block (ranging from 23 to 148 bytes of data) is transmitted over four frames, using a single time slot. On average, this requires 20 ms for one way transmission. Under the RTTI scheme, one data block is transmitted over two frames in two timeslots, reducing the latency of the air interface to 10 ms.\nIn addition, Reduced Latency also implies support of Piggy-backed ACK/NACK (PAN), in which a bitmap of blocks not received is included in normal data blocks. Using the PAN field, the receiver may report missing data blocks immediately, rather than waiting to send a dedicated PAN message.\nA final enhancement is RLC-non persistent mode. With EDGE, the RLC interface could operate in either acknowledged mode, or unacknowledged mode. In unacknowledged mode, there is no retransmission of missing data blocks, so a single corrupt block would cause an entire upper-layer IP packet to be lost. With non-persistent mode, an RLC data block may be retransmitted if it is less than a certain age. Once this time expires, it is considered lost, and subsequent data blocks may then be forwarded to upper layers.\nDownlink Dual Carrier.\nWith Downlink Dual Carrier, the handheld is able to receive on two different frequency channels at the same time, doubling the downlink throughput. In addition, if second receiver is present then the handheld is able to receive on an additional timeslot in single-carrier mode, because it may overlap the tuning of one receiver with other tasks.\nHigher Modulation Schemes.\nBoth uplink and downlink throughput is improved by using 16 or 32 QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation), along with turbo codes and higher symbol rates.\nNetworks.\nThe Global mobile Suppliers Association (GSA) states that, as of May 2013, there were 604 GSM/EDGE networks in 213 countries, from a total of 606 mobile network operator commitments in 213 countries."}
{"id": "10214", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10214", "title": "EDGE", "text": ""}
{"id": "10216", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10216", "title": "Eth", "text": "Eth (, uppercase: \u00d0, lowercase: \u00f0; also spelled edh or e\u00f0) known as \u00f0\u00e6t in Old English, is a letter used in Old English, Middle English, Icelandic, Faroese (in which it is called \"edd\"), and Elfdalian. \nIt was also used in Scandinavia during the Middle Ages, but was subsequently replaced with \"dh\", and later \"d\". \nIt is often transliterated as \"d\". \nThe lowercase version has been adopted to represent a voiced dental fricative in the International Phonetic Alphabet.\nOld English.\nIn Old English, \"\u00f0\" (called \"\") was used interchangeably with \"\u00fe\" to represent the Old English dental fricative phoneme or its allophone , which exist in modern English phonology as the voiced and voiceless dental fricatives both now spelled \"th\".\nUnlike the runic letter \u00fe, \u00f0 is a modified Roman letter. Neither \u00f0 nor \u00fe were found in the earliest records of Old English. A study of Mercian royal diplomas found that \u00f0 (along with \u0111) began to emerge in the early 8th century, with \u00f0 becoming strongly preferred by the 780s. Another source indicates that the letter is \"derived from Irish writing\". \nUnder King \u00c6lfred the Great, \u00fe grew greatly in popularity and started to overtake \u00f0. \u00de completely overtook \u00f0 by Middle English, and \u00fe died out by Early Modern English, mostly due to the rise of the printing press, and was replaced by the digraph \"th\". \nLower case version.\nThe lowercase (minuscule) version has retained the curved shape of a medieval scribe's \"d\", which \"d\" itself in general has not.\nIcelandic.\nIn Icelandic, \"\u00f0\" represents a voiced dental fricative , which is the same as the \"th\" in English \"that\", but it never appears as the first letter of a word, where \"\u00fe\" is used instead. The name of the letter is pronounced in isolation (and before words beginning with a voiceless consonant) as and therefore with a voiceless rather than voiced fricative.\nFaroese.\nIn Faroese, \"\u00f0\" is not assigned to any particular phoneme, and appears mostly for etymological reasons; however, it does show where most of the Faroese glides are; when \"\u00f0\" appears before \"r\", it is, in a few words, pronounced . In the Icelandic and Faroese alphabets, \"\u00f0\" follows \"d\".\nIn Olav Jakobsen H\u00f8yem's version of based on , \"\u00f0\" was always silent, and was introduced for etymological reasons.\nWelsh.\n\"\u00d0\" has also been used by some in written Welsh to represent , which is normally represented as \"dd\".\nKhmer.\n\"\u00d0\" used in Khmer romanization, e.g. \"pre\u00f0h ri\u00f0ci\u00f0naacak kampuci\u00f0\" (Kingdom of Cambodia).\nPhonetic transcription.\n is used in phonetic transcription.\n is used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet.\nComputer input.\nThe Faroese and Icelandic keyboard layouts have a dedicated button for eth.\nOn Microsoft Windows, eth can be typed using the alt code +() for lowercase or +() for uppercase, or by typing using the US International keyboard layout.\nOn macOS, eth can be typed by activating the ABC Extended keyboard layout and typing .\nUsing the compose key (\"multi key\") which is popular on Linux, eth can be typed by typing for lowercase or for capital letters.\nOn Chrome OS with 'extended keyboard' Chrome extension, will result in \u00f0 being displayed; will result in \u00d0.\nModern uses.\nThis operator gives rise to spin-weighted spherical harmonics."}
{"id": "10217", "revid": "96340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10217", "title": "Eth, Nord", "text": "Eth is a commune in the Nord department in northern France.\nIt is about east-southeast of Valenciennes. Residents are called Ethois (feminine plural Ethoises)."}
{"id": "10221", "revid": "1012957155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10221", "title": "Euphrates", "text": "The Euphrates () is the longest and one of the most historically important rivers of Western Asia. Together with the Tigris, it is one of the two defining rivers of Mesopotamia (the \"Land Between the Rivers\"). Originating in the Armenian Highlands of eastern Turkey, the Euphrates flows through Syria and Iraq to join the Tigris in the Shatt al-Arab, which empties into the Persian Gulf.\nEtymology.\nThe Ancient Greek form \"Euphr\u00e1t\u0113s\" (, as if from Greek \u03b5\u1f56 \"good\" and \u03d5\u03c1\u03ac\u03b6\u03c9 \"I announce or declare\") was adapted from Old Persian \ud800\udfa2\ud800\udfb3\ud800\udfbc\ud800\udfa0\ud800\udfac\ud800\udfa2 \"Ufr\u0101tu\", itself from Elamite \ud808\udf11\ud808\udd41\ud808\ude8f\ud808\udf05\ud808\udd56 \"\u00fa-ip-ra-tu-i\u0161\". The Elamite name is ultimately derived from a name spelt in cuneiform as \ud808\udf13\ud808\udd12\ud808\ude63 , which read as Sumerian language is \"Buranuna\" and read as Akkadian language is \"Purattu\"; many cuneiform signs have a Sumerian pronunciation and an Akkadian pronunciation, taken from a Sumerian word and an Akkadian word that mean the same. In Akkadian the river was called \"Purattu\", which has been perpetuated in Semitic languages (cf. ; \"P\u01ddr\u0101t\") and in other nearby languages of the time (cf. Hurrian \"Puranti\", Sabarian \"Uruttu\"). The Elamite, Akkadian, and possibly Sumerian forms are suggested to be from an unrecorded substrate language. Tamaz V. Gamkrelidze and Vyacheslav Ivanov suggest the Proto-Sumerian *burudu \"copper\" (Sumerian \"urudu\") as an origin, with an explanation that Euphrates was the river by which copper ore was transported in rafts, since Mesopotamia was the center of copper metallurgy during the period. The name is \"Yeprat\" in Armenian (), \"Perat\" in Hebrew (), in Turkish and in Kurdish.\nThe earliest references to the Euphrates come from cuneiform texts found in Shuruppak and pre-Sargonic Nippur in southern Iraq and date to the mid-3rd millennium BCE. In these texts, written in Sumerian, the Euphrates is called \"Buranuna\" (logographic: UD.KIB.NUN). The name could also be written KIB.NUN.(NA) or dKIB.NUN, with the prefix \"d\" indicating that the river was a divinity. In Sumerian, the name of the city of Sippar in modern-day Iraq was also written UD.KIB.NUN, indicating a historically strong relationship between the city and the river.\nCourse.\nThe Euphrates is the longest river of Western Asia. It emerges from the confluence of the Kara Su or Western Euphrates () and the Murat Su or Eastern Euphrates () upstream from the town of Keban in southeastern Turkey. Daoudy and Frenken put the length of the Euphrates from the source of the Murat River to the confluence with the Tigris at , of which is in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. The same figures are given by Isaev and Mikhailova. The length of the Shatt al-Arab, which connects the Euphrates and the Tigris with the Persian Gulf, is given by various sources as .\nBoth the Kara Su and the Murat Su rise northwest from Lake Van at elevations of and amsl, respectively. At the location of the Keban Dam, the two rivers, now combined into the Euphrates, have dropped to an elevation of amsl. From Keban to the Syrian\u2013Turkish border, the river drops another over a distance of less than . Once the Euphrates enters the Upper Mesopotamian plains, its grade drops significantly; within Syria the river falls while over the last stretch between H\u012bt and the Shatt al-Arab the river drops only .\nDischarge.\nThe Euphrates receives most of its water in the form of rainfall and melting snow, resulting in peak volumes during the months April through May. Discharge in these two months accounts for 36 percent of the total annual discharge of the Euphrates, or even 60\u201370 percent according to one source, while low runoff occurs in summer and autumn. The average natural annual flow of the Euphrates has been determined from early- and mid-twentieth century records as at Keban, at H\u012bt and at Hindiya. However, these averages mask the high inter-annual variability in discharge; at Birecik, just north of the Syro\u2013Turkish border, annual discharges have been measured that ranged from a low volume of in 1961 to a high of in 1963.\nThe discharge regime of the Euphrates has changed dramatically since the construction of the first dams in the 1970s. Data on Euphrates discharge collected after 1990 show the impact of the construction of the numerous dams in the Euphrates and of the increased withdrawal of water for irrigation. Average discharge at H\u012bt after 1990 has dropped to per second ( per year). The seasonal variability has equally changed. The pre-1990 peak volume recorded at H\u012bt was per second, while after 1990 it is only per second. The minimum volume at H\u012bt remained relatively unchanged, rising from per second before 1990 to per second afterward.\nTributaries.\nIn Syria, three rivers add their water to the Euphrates; the Sajur, the Balikh and the Khabur. These rivers rise in the foothills of the Taurus Mountains along the Syro\u2013Turkish border and add comparatively little water to the Euphrates. The Sajur is the smallest of these tributaries; emerging from two streams near Gaziantep and draining the plain around Manbij before emptying into the reservoir of the Tishrin Dam. The Balikh receives most of its water from a karstic spring near 'Ayn al-'Arus and flows due south until it reaches the Euphrates at the city of Raqqa. In terms of length, drainage basin and discharge, the Khabur is the largest of these three. Its main karstic springs are located around Ra's al-'Ayn, from where the Khabur flows southeast past Al-Hasakah, where the river turns south and drains into the Euphrates near Busayrah. Once the Euphrates enters Iraq, there are no more natural tributaries to the Euphrates, although canals connecting the Euphrates basin with the Tigris basin exist.\nDrainage basin.\nThe drainage basins of the Kara Su and the Murat River cover an area of and , respectively. Estimates of the area of the Euphrates drainage basin vary widely; from a low to a high . Recent estimates put the basin area at , and . The greater part of the Euphrates basin is located in Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. According to both Daoudy and Frenken, Turkey's share is 28 percent, Syria's is 17 percent and that of Iraq is 40 percent. Isaev and Mikhailova estimate the percentages of the drainage basin lying within Turkey, Syria and Iraq at 33, 20 and 47 percent respectively. Some sources estimate that approximately 15 percent of the drainage basin is located within Saudi Arabia, while a small part falls inside the borders of Kuwait. Finally, some sources also include Jordan in the drainage basin of the Euphrates; a small part of the eastern desert () drains toward the east rather than to the west.\nNatural history.\nThe Euphrates flows through a number of distinct vegetation zones. Although millennia-long human occupation in most parts of the Euphrates basin has significantly degraded the landscape, patches of original vegetation remain. The steady drop in annual rainfall from the sources of the Euphrates toward the Persian Gulf is a strong determinant for the vegetation that can be supported. In its upper reaches the Euphrates flows through the mountains of Southeast Turkey and their southern foothills which support a xeric woodland. Plant species in the moister parts of this zone include various oaks, pistachio trees, and \"Rosaceae\" (rose/plum family). The drier parts of the xeric woodland zone supports less dense oak forest and \"Rosaceae\". Here can also be found the wild variants of many cereals, including einkorn wheat, emmer wheat, oat and rye. South of this zone lies a zone of mixed woodland-steppe vegetation. Between Raqqa and the Syro\u2013Iraqi border the Euphrates flows through a steppe landscape. This steppe is characterised by white wormwood (\"Artemisia herba-alba\") and \"Chenopodiaceae\". Throughout history, this zone has been heavily overgrazed due to the practicing of sheep and goat pastoralism by its inhabitants. Southeast of the border between Syria and Iraq starts true desert. This zone supports either no vegetation at all or small pockets of \"Chenopodiaceae\" or \"Poa sinaica\". Although today nothing of it survives due to human interference, research suggests that the Euphrates Valley would have supported a riverine forest. Species characteristic of this type of forest include the Oriental plane, the Euphrates poplar, the tamarisk, the ash and various wetland plants.\nAmong the fish species in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin, the family of the Cyprinidae are the most common, with 34 species out of 52 in total. Among the Cyprinids, the mangar has good sport fishing qualities, leading the British to nickname it \"Tigris salmon.\" The \"Rafetus euphraticus\" is an endangered soft-shelled turtle that is limited to the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system.\nThe Neo-Assyrian palace reliefs from the 1st millennium BCE depict lion and bull hunts in fertile landscapes. Sixteenth to nineteenth century European travellers in the Syrian Euphrates basin reported on an abundance of animals living in the area, many of which have become rare or even extinct. Species like gazelle, onager and the now-extinct Arabian ostrich lived in the steppe bordering the Euphrates valley, while the valley itself was home to the wild boar. Carnivorous species include the gray wolf, the golden jackal, the red fox, the leopard and the lion. The Syrian brown bear can be found in the mountains of Southeast Turkey. The presence of European beaver has been attested in the bone assemblage of the prehistoric site of Abu Hureyra in Syria, but the beaver has never been sighted in historical times.\nRiver.\nThe Hindiya Barrage on the Iraqi Euphrates, based on plans by British civil engineer William Willcocks and finished in 1913, was the first modern water diversion structure built in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system. The Hindiya Barrage was followed in the 1950s by the Ramadi Barrage and the nearby Abu Dibbis Regulator, which serve to regulate the flow regime of the Euphrates and to discharge excess flood water into the depression that is now Lake Habbaniyah. Iraq's largest dam on the Euphrates is the Haditha Dam; a earth-fill dam creating Lake Qadisiyah. Syria and Turkey built their first dams in the Euphrates in the 1970s. The Tabqa Dam in Syria was completed in 1973 while Turkey finished the Keban Dam, a prelude to the immense Southeastern Anatolia Project, in 1974. Since then, Syria has built two more dams in the Euphrates, the Baath Dam and the Tishrin Dam, and plans to build a fourth dam \u2013 the Halabiye Dam \u2013 between Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. The Tabqa Dam is Syria's largest dam and its reservoir (Lake Assad) is an important source of irrigation and drinking water. It was planned that should be irrigated from Lake Assad, but in 2000 only had been realized. Syria also built three smaller dams on the Khabur and its tributaries.\nWith the implementation of the Southeastern Anatolia Project (\"\", or \"GAP\") in the 1970s, Turkey launched an ambitious plan to harness the waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates for irrigation and hydroelectricity production and provide an economic stimulus to its southeastern provinces. GAP affects a total area of and approximately 7\u00a0million people; representing about 10 percent of Turkey's total surface area and population, respectively. When completed, GAP will consist of 22 dams \u2013 including the Keban Dam \u2013 and 19 power plants and provide irrigation water to of agricultural land, which is about 20 percent of the irrigable land in Turkey. C. of this irrigated land is located in the Euphrates basin. By far the largest dam in GAP is the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, located c. northwest of \u015eanl\u0131urfa. This and dam was completed in 1992; thereby creating a reservoir that is the third-largest lake in Turkey. With a maximum capacity of , the Atat\u00fcrk Dam reservoir is large enough to hold the entire annual discharge of the Euphrates. Completion of GAP was scheduled for 2010 but has been delayed because the World Bank has withheld funding due to the lack of an official agreement on water sharing between Turkey and the downstream states on the Euphrates and the Tigris.\nApart from barrages and dams, Iraq has also created an intricate network of canals connecting the Euphrates with Lake Habbaniyah, Lake Tharthar, and Abu Dibbis reservoir; all of which can be used to store excess floodwater. Via the Shatt al-Hayy, the Euphrates is connected with the Tigris. The largest canal in this network is the Main Outfall Drain or so-called \"Third River;\" constructed between 1953 and 1992. This canal is intended to drain the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris south of Baghdad to prevent soil salinization from irrigation. It also allows large freight barges to navigate up to Baghdad.\nEnvironmental and social effects.\nThe construction of the dams and irrigation schemes on the Euphrates has had a significant impact on the environment and society of each riparian country. The dams constructed as part of GAP \u2013 in both the Euphrates and the Tigris basins \u2013 have affected 382 villages and almost 200,000 people have been resettled elsewhere. The largest number of people was displaced by the building of the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, which alone affected 55,300 people. A survey among those who were displaced showed that the majority were unhappy with their new situation and that the compensation they had received was considered insufficient. The flooding of Lake Assad led to the forced displacement of c. 4,000 families, who were resettled in other parts of northern Syria as part of a now abandoned plan to create an \"Arab belt\" along the borders with Turkey and Iraq.\nApart from the changes in the discharge regime of the river, the numerous dams and irrigation projects have also had other effects on the environment. The creation of reservoirs with large surfaces in countries with high average temperatures has led to increased evaporation; thereby reducing the total amount of water that is available for human use. Annual evaporation from reservoirs has been estimated at in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. Water quality in the Iraqi Euphrates is low because irrigation water tapped in Turkey and Syria flows back into the river, together with dissolved fertilizer chemicals used on the fields. The salinity of Euphrates water in Iraq has increased as a result of upstream dam construction, leading to lower suitability as drinking water. The many dams and irrigation schemes, and the associated large-scale water abstraction, have also had a detrimental effect on the ecologically already fragile Mesopotamian Marshes and on freshwater fish habitats in Iraq.\nThe inundation of large parts of the Euphrates valley, especially in Turkey and Syria, has led to the flooding of many archaeological sites and other places of cultural significance. Although concerted efforts have been made to record or save as much of the endangered cultural heritage as possible, many sites are probably lost forever. The combined GAP projects on the Turkish Euphrates have led to major international efforts to document the archaeological and cultural heritage of the endangered parts of the valley. Especially the flooding of Zeugma with its unique Roman mosaics by the reservoir of the Birecik Dam has generated much controversy in both the Turkish and international press. The construction of the Tabqa Dam in Syria led to a large international campaign coordinated by UNESCO to document the heritage that would disappear under the waters of Lake Assad. Archaeologists from numerous countries excavated sites ranging in date from the Natufian to the Abbasid period, and two minarets were dismantled and rebuilt outside the flood zone. Important sites that have been flooded or affected by the rising waters of Lake Assad include Mureybet, Emar and Abu Hureyra. A similar international effort was made when the Tishrin Dam was constructed, which led, among others, to the flooding of the important Pre-Pottery Neolithic B site of Jerf el-Ahmar. An archaeological survey and rescue excavations were also carried out in the area flooded by Lake Qadisiya in Iraq. Parts of the flooded area have recently become accessible again due to the drying up of the lake, resulting not only in new possibilities for archaeologists to do more research, but also providing opportunities for looting, which has been rampant elsewhere in Iraq in the wake of the 2003 invasion.\nHistory.\nPalaeolithic to Chalcolithic periods.\nThe early occupation of the Euphrates basin was limited to its upper reaches; that is, the area that is popularly known as the Fertile Crescent. Acheulean stone artifacts have been found in the Sajur basin and in the El Kowm oasis in the central Syrian steppe; the latter together with remains of \"Homo erectus\" that were dated to 450,000 years old. In the Taurus Mountains and the upper part of the Syrian Euphrates valley, early permanent villages such as Abu Hureyra \u2013 at first occupied by hunter-gatherers but later by some of the earliest farmers, Jerf el-Ahmar, Mureybet and Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori became established from the eleventh millennium BCE onward. In the absence of irrigation, these early farming communities were limited to areas where rainfed agriculture was possible, that is, the upper parts of the Syrian Euphrates as well as Turkey. Late Neolithic villages, characterized by the introduction of pottery in the early 7th millennium BCE, are known throughout this area. Occupation of lower Mesopotamia started in the 6th millennium and is generally associated with the introduction of irrigation, as rainfall in this area is insufficient for dry agriculture. Evidence for irrigation has been found at several sites dating to this period, including Tell es-Sawwan. During the 5th millennium BCE, or late Ubaid period, northeastern Syria was dotted by small villages, although some of them grew to a size of over . In Iraq, sites like Eridu and Ur were already occupied during the Ubaid period. Clay boat models found at Tell Mashnaqa along the Khabur indicate that riverine transport was already practiced during this period. The Uruk period, roughly coinciding with the 4th millennium BCE, saw the emergence of truly urban settlements across Mesopotamia. Cities like Tell Brak and Uruk grew to over in size and displayed monumental architecture. The spread of southern Mesopotamian pottery, architecture and sealings far into Turkey and Iran has generally been interpreted as the material reflection of a widespread trade system aimed at providing the Mesopotamian cities with raw materials. Habuba Kabira on the Syrian Euphrates is a prominent example of a settlement that is interpreted as an Uruk colony.\nAncient history.\nDuring the Jemdet Nasr (3600\u20133100 BCE) and Early Dynastic periods (3100\u20132350 BCE), southern Mesopotamia experienced a growth in the number and size of settlements, suggesting strong population growth. These settlements, including Sumero-Akkadian sites like Sippar, Uruk, Adab and Kish, were organized in competing city-states. Many of these cities were located along canals of the Euphrates and the Tigris that have since dried up, but that can still be identified from remote sensing imagery. A similar development took place in Upper Mesopotamia, Subartu and Assyria, although only from the mid 3rd millennium and on a smaller scale than in Lower Mesopotamia. Sites like Ebla, Mari and Tell Leilan grew to prominence for the first time during this period.\nLarge parts of the Euphrates basin were for the first time united under a single ruler during the Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132154 BC) and Ur III empires, which controlled \u2013 either directly or indirectly through vassals \u2013 large parts of modern-day Iraq and northeastern Syria. Following their collapse, the Old Assyrian Empire (1975\u20131750 BCE) and Mari asserted their power over northeast Syria and northern Mesopotamia, while southern Mesopotamia was controlled by city-states like Isin, Kish and Larsa before their territories were absorbed by the newly emerged state of Babylonia under Hammurabi in the early to mid 18th century BCE.\nIn the second half of the 2nd millennium BCE, the Euphrates basin was divided between Kassite Babylon in the south and Mitanni, Assyria and the Hittite Empire in the north, with the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365\u20131020 BC) eventually eclipsing the Hittites, Mitanni and Kassite Babylonians. Following the end of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the late 11th century BCE, struggles broke out between Babylonia and Assyria over the control of the Iraqi Euphrates basin. The Neo-Assyrian Empire (935\u2013605 BC) eventually emerged victorious out of this conflict and also succeeded in gaining control of the northern Euphrates basin in the first half of the 1st millennium BCE.\nIn the centuries to come, control of the wider Euphrates basin shifted from the Neo-Assyrian Empire (which collapsed between 612 and 599 BC) to the short lived Median Empire (612\u2013546 BC) and equally brief Neo-Babylonian Empire (612\u2013539 BC) in the last years of the 7th century BC, and eventually to the Achaemenid Empire (539\u2013333 BC). The Achaemenid Empire was in turn overrun by Alexander the Great, who defeated the last king Darius III and died in Babylon in 323 BCE.\nSubsequent to this, the region came under the control of the Seleucid Empire (312\u2013150 BC), Parthian Empire (150\u2013226 AD) (during which several Neo-Assyrian states such as Adiabene came to rule certain regions of the Euphrates), and was fought over by the Roman Empire, its succeeding Byzantine Empire and the Sassanid Empire (226\u2013638 AD), until the Islamic conquest of the mid 7th century AD. The Battle of Karbala took place near the banks of this river in 680 AD.\nIn the north, the river served as a border between Greater Armenia (331 BC\u2013428 AD) and Lesser Armenia (the latter became a Roman province in the 1st century BC).\nModern era.\nAfter World War I, the borders in Southwest Asia were redrawn in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), when the Ottoman Empire was partitioned. Clause 109 of the treaty stipulated that the three riparian states of the Euphrates (at that time Turkey, France for its Syrian mandate and the United Kingdom for its mandate of Iraq) had to reach a mutual agreement on the use of its water and on the construction of any hydraulic installation. An agreement between Turkey and Iraq signed in 1946 required Turkey to report to Iraq on any hydraulic changes it made on the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system, and allowed Iraq to construct dams on Turkish territory to manage the flow of the Euphrates.\nThe river featured on the coat of arms of Iraq from 1932 to 1959.\nTurkey and Syria completed their first dams on the Euphrates \u2013 the Keban Dam and the Tabqa Dam, respectively \u2013 within one year of each other and filling of the reservoirs commenced in 1975. At the same time, the area was hit by severe drought and river flow toward Iraq was reduced from in 1973 to in 1975. This led to an international crisis during which Iraq threatened to bomb the Tabqa Dam. An agreement was eventually reached between Syria and Iraq after intervention by Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. A similar crisis, although not escalating to the point of military threats, occurred in 1981 when the Keban Dam reservoir had to be refilled after it had been almost emptied to temporarily increase Turkey's hydroelectricity production. In 1984, Turkey unilaterally declared that it would ensure a flow of at least per second, or per year, into Syria, and in 1987 a bilateral treaty to that effect was signed between the two countries. Another bilateral agreement from 1989 between Syria and Iraq settles the amount of water flowing into Iraq at 60 percent of the amount that Syria receives from Turkey. In 2008, Turkey, Syria and Iraq instigated the Joint Trilateral Committee (JTC) on the management of the water in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin and on 3 September 2009 a further agreement was signed to this effect.\nOn 15 April 2014, Turkey began to reduce the flow of the Euphrates into Syria and Iraq. The flow was cut off completely on 16 May 2014 resulting in the Euphrates terminating at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border. This was in violation of an agreement reached in 1987 in which Turkey committed to releasing a minimum of of water per second at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border.\nDuring the Syrian civil war and the Iraqi Civil War, much of the Euphrates was controlled by the Islamic State from 2014 until 2017, when the terrorist group began losing land and was eventually defeated territorially in Syria at the Battle of Baghouz and in Iraq in the Western Iraq offensive respectively.\nEconomy.\nThroughout history, the Euphrates has been of vital importance to those living along its course. With the construction of large hydropower stations, irrigation schemes, and pipelines capable of transporting water over large distances, many more people now depend on the river for basic amenities such as electricity and drinking water than in the past. Syria's Lake Assad is the most important source of drinking water for the city of Aleppo, to the west of the river valley. The lake also supports a modest state-operated fishing industry. Through a newly restored power line, the Haditha Dam in Iraq provides electricity to Baghdad."}
{"id": "10223", "revid": "1003702159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10223", "title": "Estonian language", "text": "Estonian ( ) is a Uralic language of the Finnic branch spoken in Estonia. It is the official language of Estonia, spoken natively by about 1.1\u00a0million people; 922,000 people in Estonia and 160,000 outside Estonia. It is a Southern Finnic language and is the second-most-spoken language among all the Finnic languages.\nClassification.\nEstonian belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family. The Finnic group also includes Finnish and a few minority languages spoken around the Baltic Sea and in Saint-Petersburg and Karelian region in Russia.\nAlongside Finnish, Hungarian and Maltese, Estonian is one of the four official languages of European Union that is not of an Indo-European origin. Despite some overlaps in the vocabulary due to borrowings, in terms of its origin, Estonian and Finnish are not related to their nearest geographical neighbours, Swedish, Latvian, and Russian (which are all Indo-European languages), however they are related to the nearby minority Karelian and Livonian languages.\nAlthough the Estonian and Germanic languages are of very different origins, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and German, for example. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including Standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22\u201325 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent. Swedish and Russian are the other two important sources of borrowings.\nEstonian is a predominantly agglutinative language, but unlike Finnish, it has lost vowel harmony, the front vowels occurring exclusively on the first or stressed syllable, although in older texts and in South Estonian dialects the vowel harmony can still be recognized. Furthermore, the loss of word-final sounds is extensive, and this has made its inflectional morphology markedly more fusional, especially with respect to noun and adjective inflection. The transitional form from an agglutinating to a fusional language is a common feature of Estonian typologically over the course of history with the development of a rich morphological system.\nWord order is considerably more flexible than English, but the basic order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object.\nHistory.\nThe two different historical Estonian languages (sometimes considered dialects), the North and South Estonian languages, are based on the ancestors of modern Estonians' migration into the territory of Estonia in at least two different waves, both groups speaking considerably different Finnic vernaculars. Modern standard Estonian has evolved on the basis of the dialects of Northern Estonia.\nThe oldest written records of the Finnic languages of Estonia date from the 13th century. \"Originates Livoniae\" in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.\nEstonian literature.\nThe earliest extant samples of connected (north) Estonian are the so-called Kullamaa prayers dating from 1524 and 1528. In 1525 the first book published in the Estonian language was printed. The book was a Lutheran manuscript, which never reached the reader and was destroyed immediately after publication.\nThe first extant Estonian book is a bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism by S.Wanradt and J.Koell dating to 1535, during the Protestant Reformation period. An Estonian grammar book to be used by priests was printed in German in 1637. The New Testament was translated into southern Estonian in 1686 (northern Estonian, 1715). The two languages were united based on northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle.\nWritings in Estonian became more significant in the 19th century during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840).\nThe birth of native Estonian literature was in 1810 to 1820 when the patriotic and philosophical poems by Kristjan Jaak Peterson were published. Peterson, who was the first student at the then German-language University of Dorpat to acknowledge his Estonian origin, is commonly regarded as a herald of Estonian national literature and considered the founder of modern Estonian poetry. His birthday, March 14, is celebrated in Estonia as Mother Tongue Day. A fragment from Peterson's poem \"Kuu\" expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language:\nIn English:\nIn the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in Estonian; by comparison, between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published.\nIn modern times Jaan Kross, Jaan Kaplinski and Viivi Luik are three of Estonia's best known and most translated writers.\nState language.\nWritings in Estonian became significant only in the 19th century with the spread of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment, during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840). Although Baltic Germans at large regarded the future of Estonians as being a fusion with themselves, the Estophile educated class admired the ancient culture of the Estonians and their era of freedom before the conquests by Danes and Germans in the 13th century.\nAfter the Estonian War of Independence in 1919, the Estonian language became the state language of the newly independent country. In 1945, 97.3% of Estonia considered itself ethnic Estonian and spoke the language.\nWhen Estonia was invaded and occupied by the Soviet Union in World War II, the status of the Estonian language changed to the first of two official languages (Russian being the other one). As with Latvia many immigrants entered Estonia under Soviet encouragement. In the second half of the 1970s, the pressure of bilingualism (for Estonians) intensified, resulting in widespread knowledge of Russian throughout the country. The Russian language was termed as \u2018the language of friendship of nations\u2019 and was taught to Estonian children, sometimes as early as in kindergarten. Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in schools was compulsory, in practice learning the language was often considered unnecessary.\nDuring the Perestroika era, The Law on the Status of the Estonian Language was adopted in January 1989. The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union led to the restoration of the Republic of Estonia's independence. Estonian went back to being the only state language in Estonia which in practice meant that use of Estonian was promoted while the use of Russian was discouraged.\nThe return of Soviet immigrants to their countries of origin has brought the proportion of Estonians in Estonia back above 70%. And again as in Latvia, today many of the remnant non-Estonians in Estonia have adopted the Estonian language; about 40% at the 2000 census.\nDialects.\nThe Estonian dialects are divided into two groups\u00a0\u2013 the northern and southern dialects, historically associated with the cities of Tallinn in the north and Tartu in the south, in addition to a distinct \"kirderanniku\" dialect, Northeastern coastal Estonian.\nThe northern group consists of the or central dialect that is also the basis for the standard language, the or western dialect, roughly corresponding to L\u00e4\u00e4ne County and P\u00e4rnu County, the (islands' dialect) of Saaremaa, Hiiumaa, Muhu and Kihnu, and the or eastern dialect on the northwestern shore of Lake Peipus.\nSouth Estonian consists of the Tartu, Mulgi, V\u00f5ro and Seto varieties. These are sometimes considered either variants of South Estonian or separate languages altogether. Also, Seto and V\u00f5ro distinguish themselves from each other less by language and more by their culture and their respective Christian confession.\nWriting system.\nAlphabet.\nEstonian employs the Latin script as the basis for its alphabet, which adds the letters \"\u00e4\", \"\u00f6\", \"\u00fc\", and \"\u00f5\", plus the later additions \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\". The letters \"c\", \"q\", \"w\", \"x\" and \"y\" are limited to proper names of foreign origin, and \"f\", \"z\", \"\u0161\", and \"\u017e\" appear in loanwords and foreign names only. \"\u00d6\" and \"\u00dc\" are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German. Unlike in standard German but like Swedish (when followed by 'r') and Finnish, \"\u00c4\" is pronounced [\u00e6], as in English \"mat\". The vowels \u00c4, \u00d6 and \u00dc are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian, although the letter shapes come from German. The letter \"\u00f5\" denotes , unrounded , or a close-mid back unrounded vowel. It is almost identical to the Bulgarian \u044a and the Vietnamese \u01a1, and is also used to transcribe the Russian \u044b.\nOrthography.\nAlthough the Estonian orthography is generally guided by phonemic principles, with each grapheme corresponding to one phoneme, there are some historical and morphological deviations from this: for example preservation of the morpheme in declension of the word (writing b, g, d in places where p, k, t is pronounced) and in the use of 'i' and 'j'. Where it is very impractical or impossible to type \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\", they are substituted with \"sh\" and \"zh\" in some written texts, although this is considered incorrect. Otherwise, the \"h\" in \"sh\" represents a voiceless glottal fricative, as in \"Pasha\" (\"pas-ha\"); this also applies to some foreign names.\nModern Estonian orthography is based on the \"Newer Orthography\" created by Eduard Ahrens in the second half of the 19thcentury based on Finnish orthography. The \"Older Orthography\" it replaced was created in the 17thcentury by Bengt Gottfried Forselius and Johann Hornung based on standard German orthography. Earlier writing in Estonian had by and large used an \"ad hoc\" orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography. Some influences of the standard German orthography \u2013 for example, writing 'W'/'w' instead of 'V'/'v' \u2013 persisted well into the 1930s.\nEstonian words and names quoted in international publications from Soviet sources are often back-transliterations from the Russian transliteration. Examples are the use of \"ya\" for \"\u00e4\" (e.g. Pyarnu instead of P\u00e4rnu), \"y\" instead of \"\u00f5\" (e.g., Pylva instead of P\u00f5lva) and \"yu\" instead of \"\u00fc\" (e.g., Pyussi instead of P\u00fcssi). Even in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" one can find \"ostrov Khiuma\", where \"ostrov\" means \"island\" in Russian and \"Khiuma\" is back-transliteration from Russian instead of \"Hiiumaa\" (\"Hiiumaa\" &gt; \u0425\u0438\u0439\u0443\u043c\u0430(\u0430) &gt; \"Khiuma\").\nPhonology.\nThere are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs, 28 of which are native to Estonian.[1] All nine vowels can appear as the first component of a diphthong, but only /\u0251 e i o u/ occur as the second component. A vowel characteristic of Estonian is the unrounded back vowel /\u0264/, which may be close-mid back, close back, or close-mid central.\nGrammar.\nTypologically, Estonian represents a transitional form from an agglutinating language to a fusional language. The canonical word order is SVO (subject\u2013verb\u2013object).\nIn Estonian, nouns and pronouns do not have grammatical gender, but nouns and adjectives decline in fourteen cases: nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive, abessive, and comitative, with the case and number of the adjective always agreeing with that of the noun (except in the terminative, essive, abessive and comitative, where there is agreement only for the number, the adjective being in the genitive form). Thus the illative for \"kollane maja\" (\"a yellow house\") is \"kollasesse majja\" (\"into a yellow house\"), but the terminative is \"kollase majani\" (\"as far as a yellow house\"). With respect to the Proto-Finnic language, elision has occurred; thus, the actual case marker may be absent, but the stem is changed, cf. \"maja\u00a0\u2013 majja\" and the Ostrobothnia dialect of Finnish \"maja\u00a0\u2013 majahan\".\nThe direct object of the verb appears either in the accusative (for total objects) or in the partitive (for partial objects). The accusative coincides with the genitive in the singular and with nominative in the plural. Accusative vs. partitive case opposition of the object used with transitive verbs creates a telicity contrast, just as in Finnish. This is a rough equivalent of the perfective vs. imperfective aspect opposition.\nThe verbal system lacks a distinctive future tense (the present tense serves here) and features special forms to express an action performed by an undetermined subject (the \"impersonal\").\nVocabulary.\nAlthough the Estonian and Germanic languages are of very different origins and the vocabulary is considered quite different from that of the Indo-European family, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and English, for example. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22\u201325 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent.\nOften 'b' &amp; 'p' are interchangeable, for example 'baggage' becomes 'pagas', 'lob' (to throw) becomes 'loopima'. The initial letter 's' before another consonant is often dropped, for example 'skool' becomes 'kool', 'stool' becomes 'tool'.\n\"Ex nihilo\" lexical enrichment.\nEstonian language planners such as Ado Grenzstein (a journalist active in Estonia in the 1870s\u201390s) tried to use formation \"ex nihilo\", Ursch\u00f6pfung; i.e. they created new words out of nothing.\nThe most famous reformer of Estonian, Johannes Aavik (1880\u20131973), used creations \"ex nihilo\" (cf. \u2018free constructions\u2019, Tauli 1977), along with other sources of lexical enrichment such as derivations, compositions and loanwords (often from Finnish; cf. Saareste and Raun 1965: 76). In Aavik's dictionary (1921), which lists approximately 4000 words, there are many words which were (allegedly) created \"ex nihilo\", many of which are in common use today. Examples are\nMany of the coinages that have been considered (often by Aavik himself) as words concocted \"ex nihilo\" could well have been influenced by foreign lexical items, for example words from Russian, German, French, Finnish, English and Swedish. Aavik had a broad classical education and knew Ancient Greek, Latin and French. Consider \"roim\" \u2018crime\u2019 versus English \"crime\" or \"taunima\" \u2018to condemn, disapprove\u2019 versus Finnish \"tuomita\" \u2018to condemn, to judge\u2019 (these Aavikisms appear in Aavik's 1921 dictionary). These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item.\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Estonian:"}
{"id": "10224", "revid": "16177744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10224", "title": "E-Prime", "text": "E-Prime (short for English-Prime or English Prime, sometimes denoted \u00c9 or E\u2032) refers to a version of the English language that excludes all forms of the verb \"to be\", including all conjugations, contractions and archaic forms.\nSome scholars advocate using E-Prime as a device to clarify thinking and strengthen writing. A number of other scholars have criticized E-Prime's utility.\nHistory.\nD. David Bourland Jr., who had studied under Alfred Korzybski, devised E-Prime as an addition to Korzybski's general semantics in the late 1940s. Bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled \"A Linguistic Note: Writing in E-Prime\" (originally published in \"General Semantics Bulletin\"). The essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field, partly because practitioners of general semantics sometimes saw Bourland as attacking the verb \"to be\" as such, and not just certain usages.\nBourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation. The first (1991), co-edited by Paul Dennithorne Johnston, bore the title: \"To Be or Not: An E-Prime Anthology\".\nFor the second, \"More E-Prime: To Be or Not II\", published in 1994, he added a third editor, Jeremy Klein. Bourland and Johnston then edited a third book, \"E-Prime III: a third anthology\", published in 1997.\nDifferent functions of \"to be\".\nIn the English language, the verb 'to be' (also known as the \"copula\") has several distinct functions:\nBourland sees specifically the \"identity\" and \"predication\" functions as pernicious, but advocates eliminating all forms for the sake of simplicity. In the case of the \"existence\" form (and less idiomatically, the \"location\" form), one might (for example) simply substitute the verb \"exists\". Other copula-substitutes in English include \"taste\", \"feel\", \"smell\", \"sound\", \"grow\", \"remain\", \"stay\", and \"turn\", among others a user of E-prime might use instead of \"to be\".\nExamples.\nWords not used in E-prime include: be, being, been, am, is, isn't, are, aren't, was, wasn't, were, and weren't.\nContractions formed from a pronoun and a form of \"to be\" are also not used, including: I'm, you're, we're, they're, he's, she's, it's, there's, here's, where's, how's, what's, who's, and that's. E-Prime also prohibits contractions of \"to be\" found in nonstandard dialects of English, such as \"ain't\".\nRationale.\nBourland and other advocates also suggest that use of E-Prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict.\nKellogg and Bourland describe misuse of the verb \"to be\" as creating a \"deity mode of speech\", allowing \"even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-like pronouncements on the nature of things\".\nPsychological effects.\nWhile teaching at the University of Florida, Alfred Korzybski counseled his students to eliminate the infinitive and verb forms of \"to be\" from their vocabulary, whereas a second group continued to use \"I am,\" \"You are,\" \"They are\" statements as usual. For example, instead of saying, \"I am depressed,\" a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else, such as, \"I feel depressed when ...\" or \"I tend to make myself depressed about ...\"\nKorzybski observed improvement \"of one full letter grade\" by \"students who did not generalize by using that infinitive\".\nAlbert Ellis advocated the use of E-Prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary (see also Solution focused brief therapy) and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements. According to Ellis, rational emotive behavior therapy \"has favored E-Prime more than any other form of psychotherapy and I think it is still the only form of therapy that has some of its main books written in E-Prime\". However, Ellis did not always use E-Prime because he believed it interferes with readability.\nCriticisms.\nMany authors have questioned E-Prime's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudice (Lakoff, 1992; Murphy, 1992; Parkinson, 1992; Kenyon, 1992; French, 1992, 1993; Lohrey, 1993). These authors observed that a communication under the copula ban can remain extremely unclear and imply prejudice, while losing important speech patterns, such as identities and identification. Further, prejudices and judgments that are made are more difficult to notice or refute. James D. French, a computer programmer at the University of California, Berkeley, summarized ten arguments against E-Prime (in the context of general semantics) as follows:\nAccording to an article (written in E-Prime and advocating a role for E-Prime in ESL and EFL programs) published by the Office of English Language Programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the State Department of the United States, \"Requiring students to avoid the verb to be on every assignment would deter students from developing other fundamental skills of fluent writing.\""}
{"id": "10225", "revid": "35859266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10225", "title": "Elliptic curve", "text": "In mathematics, an elliptic curve is a smooth, projective, algebraic curve of genus one, on which there is a specified point \"O\". An elliptic curve is defined over a field \"K\" and describes points in \"K\"2, the Cartesian product of \"K\" with itself. If the field has characteristic different from 2 and 3 then the curve can be described as a plane algebraic curve which, after a linear change of variables, consists of solutions (\"x\",\"y\") to:\nfor some coefficients \"a\" and \"b\" in \"K\". The curve is required to be non-singular, which means that the curve has no cusps or self-intersections. (This is equivalent to the condition formula_2.) It is always understood that the curve is really sitting in the projective plane, with the point \"O\" being the unique point at infinity. Many sources define an elliptic curve to be simply a curve given by an equation of this form. (When the coefficient field has characteristic 2 or 3, the above equation is not quite general enough to include all non-singular cubic curves; see below.)\nAn elliptic curve is an abelian variety \u2013 that is, it has a group law defined algebraically, with respect to which it is an abelian group \u2013 and \"O\" serves as the identity element. \nIf \"y\"2 = \"P\"(\"x\"), where \"P\" is any polynomial of degree three in \"x\" with no repeated roots, the solution set is a nonsingular plane curve of genus one, an elliptic curve. If \"P\" has degree four and is square-free this equation again describes a plane curve of genus one; however, it has no natural choice of identity element. More generally, any algebraic curve of genus one, for example the intersection of two quadric surfaces embedded in three-dimensional projective space, is called an elliptic curve, provided that it is equipped with a marked point to act as the identity.\nUsing the theory of elliptic functions, it can be shown that elliptic curves defined over the complex numbers correspond to embeddings of the torus into the complex projective plane. The torus is also an abelian group, and this correspondence is also a group isomorphism.\nElliptic curves are especially important in number theory, and constitute a major area of current research; for example, they were used in Andrew Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. They also find applications in elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and integer factorization.\nAn elliptic curve is \"not\" an ellipse: see elliptic integral for the origin of the term. Topologically, a complex elliptic curve is a torus, while a complex ellipse is a sphere.\nElliptic curves over the real numbers.\nAlthough the formal definition of an elliptic curve requires some background in algebraic geometry, it is possible to describe some features of elliptic curves over the real numbers using only introductory algebra and geometry.\nIn this context, an elliptic curve is a plane curve defined by an equation of the form\nafter a linear change of variables (\"a\" and \"b\" are real numbers). This type of equation is called a Weierstrass equation.\nThe definition of elliptic curve also requires that the curve be non-singular. Geometrically, this means that the graph has no cusps, self-intersections, or isolated points. Algebraically, this holds if and only if the discriminant\nis not equal to zero. (Although the factor \u221216 is irrelevant to whether or not the curve is non-singular, this definition of the discriminant is useful in a more advanced study of elliptic curves.)\nThe (real) graph of a non-singular curve has \"two\" components if its discriminant is positive, and \"one\" component if it is negative. For example, in the graphs shown in figure to the right, the discriminant in the first case is 64, and in the second case is \u2212368.\nThe group law.\nWhen working in the projective plane, we can define a group structure on any smooth cubic curve. In Weierstrass normal form, such a curve will have an additional point at infinity, \"O\", at the homogeneous coordinates [0:1:0] which serves as the identity of the group.\nSince the curve is symmetrical about the x-axis, given any point \"P\", we can take \u2212\"P\" to be the point opposite it. We take \u2212\"O\" to be just \"O\".\nIf \"P\" and \"Q\" are two points on the curve, then we can uniquely describe a third point, \"P\" + \"Q\", in the following way. First, draw the line that intersects \"P\" and \"Q\". This will generally intersect the cubic at a third point, \"R\". We then take to be \u2212\"R\", the point opposite \"R\".\nThis definition for addition works except in a few special cases related to the point at infinity and intersection multiplicity. The first is when one of the points is \"O\". Here, we define , making \"O\" the identity of the group. Next, if \"P\" and \"Q\" are opposites of each other, we define . Lastly, if we only have one point, thus we can't define the line between them. In this case, we use the tangent line to the curve at this point as our line. In most cases, the tangent will intersect a second point \"R\" and we can take its opposite. However, if \"P\" happens to be an inflection point (a point where the concavity of the curve changes), we take \"R\" to be \"P\" itself and \"P\" + \"P\" is simply the point opposite itself.\nFor a cubic curve not in Weierstrass normal form, we can still define a group structure by designating one of its nine inflection points as the identity \"O\". In the projective plane, each line will intersect a cubic at three points when accounting for multiplicity. For a point \"P\", \u2212\"P\" is defined as the unique third point on the line passing through \"O\" and \"P\". Then, for any \"P\" and \"Q\", \"P\" + \"Q\" is defined as \u2212\"R\" where \"R\" is the unique third point on the line containing \"P\" and \"Q\".\nLet \"K\" be a field over which the curve is defined (i.e., the coefficients of the defining equation or equations of the curve are in \"K\") and denote the curve by \"E\". Then the \"K\"-rational points of \"E\" are the points on \"E\" whose coordinates all lie in \"K\", including the point at infinity. The set of \"K\"-rational points is denoted by \"E\"(\"K\"). It, too, forms a group, because properties of polynomial equations show that if \"P\" is in \"E\"(\"K\"), then \u2212\"P\" is also in \"E\"(\"K\"), and if two of \"P\", \"Q\", and \"R\" are in \"E\"(\"K\"), then so is the third. Additionally, if \"K\" is a subfield of \"L\", then \"E\"(\"K\") is a subgroup of \"E\"(\"L\").\nThe above group can be described algebraically as well as geometrically. Given the curve \"y\"2 = \"x\"3 + \"ax\" + \"b\" over the field \"K\" (whose characteristic we assume to be neither 2 nor 3), and points \"P\" = (\"xP\", \"yP\") and \"Q\" = (\"xQ\", \"yQ\") on the curve, assume first that \"xP\" \u2260 \"xQ\" (first pane below). Let \"y = sx + d\" be the line that intersects \"P\" and \"Q\", which has the following slope:\nSince \"K\" is a field, \"s\" is well-defined. The line equation and the curve equation have an identical \"y\" in the points \"xP\", \"xQ\", and \"xR\".\nwhich is equivalent to formula_7. We know that this equation has its roots in exactly the same \"x\"-values as\nWe equate the coefficient for \"x2\" and solve for \"xR\". \"yR\" follows from the line equation. This defines \"R\" = (\"xR\", \"yR\") = \u2212(\"P\" + \"Q\") with\nIf \"xP\" = \"xQ\", then there are two options: if \"yP\" = \u2212\"yQ\" (third and fourth panes below), including the case where \"yP\" = \"yQ\" = 0 (fourth pane), then the sum is defined as 0; thus, the inverse of each point on the curve is found by reflecting it across the \"x\"-axis. If \"yP\" = \"yQ\" \u2260 0, then \"Q\" = \"P\" and \"R\" = (\"x\"\"R\", \"y\"\"R\") = \u2212(\"P\" + \"P\") = \u22122\"P\" = \u22122\"Q\" (second pane below with \"P\" shown for \"R\") is given by\nElliptic curves over the complex numbers.\nThe formulation of elliptic curves as the embedding of a torus in the complex projective plane follows naturally from a curious property of Weierstrass's elliptic functions. These functions and their first derivative are related by the formula\nHere, \"g\"2 and \"g\"3 are constants; formula_12 is the Weierstrass elliptic function and formula_13 its derivative. It should be clear that this relation is in the form of an elliptic curve (over the complex numbers). The Weierstrass functions are doubly periodic; that is, they are periodic with respect to a lattice \u039b; in essence, the Weierstrass functions are naturally defined on a torus \"T\" = C/\u039b. This torus may be embedded in the complex projective plane by means of the map\nThis map is a group isomorphism of the torus (considered with its natural group structure) with the chord-and-tangent group law on the cubic curve which is the image of this map. It is also an isomorphism of Riemann surfaces from the torus to the cubic curve, so topologically, an elliptic curve is a torus. If the lattice \u039b is related by multiplication by a non-zero complex number \"c\" to a lattice \"c\"\u039b, then the corresponding curves are isomorphic. Isomorphism classes of elliptic curves are specified by the j-invariant.\nThe isomorphism classes can be understood in a simpler way as well. The constants \"g\"2 and \"g\"3, called the modular invariants, are uniquely determined by the lattice, that is, by the structure of the torus. However, all real polynomials factorize completely into linear factors over the complex numbers, since the field of complex numbers is the algebraic closure of the reals. So, the elliptic curve may be written as\nOne finds that\nand\nso that the modular discriminant is\nHere, \u03bb is sometimes called the modular lambda function.\nNote that the uniformization theorem implies that every compact Riemann surface of genus one can be represented as a torus.\nThis also allows an easy understanding of the torsion points on an elliptic curve: if the lattice \u039b is spanned by the fundamental periods \u03c91 and \u03c92, then the \"n\"-torsion points are the (equivalence classes of) points of the form\nfor \"a\" and \"b\" integers in the range from 0 to \"n\"\u22121.\nIf formula_20 is an elliptic curve over the complex numbers and formula_21, formula_22 and formula_23, then a pair of fundamental periods of formula_24 can be calculated very rapidly by formula_25 and formula_26 where formula_27 is the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of formula_28 and formula_29. At each step of the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean iteration, the signs of formula_30 arising from the ambiguity of geometric mean iterations are chosen such that formula_31 where formula_32 and formula_30 denote the individual arithmetic mean and geometric mean iterations of formula_28 and formula_29, respectively. When formula_36, there is an additional condition that formula_37. \nOver the complex numbers, every elliptic curve has nine inflection points. Every line through two of these points also passes through a third inflection point; the nine points and 12 lines formed in this way form a realization of the Hesse configuration.\nElliptic curves over the rational numbers.\nA curve \"E\" defined over the field of rational numbers is also defined over the field of real numbers. Therefore, the law of addition (of points with real coordinates) by the tangent and secant method can be applied to \"E\". The explicit formulae show that the sum of two points \"P\" and \"Q\" with rational coordinates has again rational coordinates, since the line joining \"P\" and \"Q\" has rational coefficients. This way, one shows that the set of rational points of \"E\" forms a subgroup of the group of real points of \"E\". As this group, it is an abelian group, that is, \"P\" + \"Q\" = \"Q\" + \"P\".\nThe structure of rational points.\nThe most important result is that all points can be constructed by the method of tangents and secants starting with a \"finite\" number of points. More precisely the Mordell\u2013Weil theorem states that the group \"E\"(Q) is a finitely generated (abelian) group. By the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups it is therefore a finite direct sum of copies of Z and finite cyclic groups.\nThe proof of that theorem rests on two ingredients: first, one shows that for any integer \"m\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01, the quotient group \"E\"(Q)/\"mE\"(Q) is finite (weak Mordell\u2013Weil theorem). Second, introducing a height function \"h\" on the rational points \"E\"(Q) defined by \"h\"(\"P\"0) = 0 and if \"P\" (unequal to the point at infinity \"P\"0) has as abscissa the rational number \"x\" = \"p\"/\"q\" (with coprime \"p\" and \"q\"). This height function \"h\" has the property that \"h\"(\"mP\") grows roughly like the square of \"m\". Moreover, only finitely many rational points with height smaller than any constant exist on \"E\".\nThe proof of the theorem is thus a variant of the method of infinite descent and relies on the repeated application of Euclidean divisions on \"E\": let \"P\" \u2208 \"E\"(Q) be a rational point on the curve, writing \"P\" as the sum 2\"P\"1 + \"Q\"1 where \"Q\"1 is a fixed representant of \"P\" in \"E\"(Q)/2\"E\"(Q), the height of \"P\"1 is about of the one of \"P\" (more generally, replacing 2 by any \"m\" &gt; 1, and by ). Redoing the same with \"P\"1, that is to say \"P\"1 = 2\"P\"2 + \"Q\"2, then \"P\"2 = 2\"P\"3 + \"Q\"3, etc. finally expresses \"P\" as an integral linear combination of points \"Qi\" and of points whose height is bounded by a fixed constant chosen in advance: by the weak Mordell\u2013Weil theorem and the second property of the height function \"P\" is thus expressed as an integral linear combination of a finite number of fixed points.\nSo far, the theorem is not effective since there is no known general procedure for determining representatives of \"E\"(Q)/\"mE\"(Q).\nThe rank of \"E\"(Q), that is the number of copies of Z in \"E\"(Q) or, equivalently, the number of independent points of infinite order, is called the \"rank\" of \"E\". The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture is concerned with determining the rank. One conjectures that it can be arbitrarily large, even if only examples with relatively small rank are known. The elliptic curve with biggest exactly known rank is\nIt has rank 20, found by Noam Elkies and Zev Klagsbrun in 2020. Curves of rank higher than 20 were known since 1994, with lower bounds on their ranks ranging from at-least-21 to at-least-28, but their exact ranks are not currently known and in particular it is not proven which of them have higher rank than the others or which is the true \"current champion\".\nAs for the groups constituting the torsion subgroup of \"E\"(Q), the following is known: the torsion subgroup of \"E\"(Q) is one of the 15 following groups (a theorem due to Barry Mazur): Z/\"NZ for \"N\" = 1, 2, ..., 10, or 12, or Z/2Z \u00d7 Z/2\"NZ with \"N\" = 1, 2, 3, 4. Examples for every case are known. Moreover, elliptic curves whose Mordell\u2013Weil groups over Q have the same torsion groups belong to a parametrized family.\nThe Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.\nThe \"Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture\" (BSD) is one of the Millennium problems of the Clay Mathematics Institute. The conjecture relies on analytic and arithmetic objects defined by the elliptic curve in question.\nAt the analytic side, an important ingredient is a function of a complex variable, \"L\", the Hasse\u2013Weil zeta function of \"E\" over Q. This function is a variant of the Riemann zeta function and Dirichlet L-functions. It is defined as an Euler product, with one factor for every prime number \"p\".\nFor a curve \"E\" over Q given by a minimal equation\nwith integral coefficients formula_39, reducing the coefficients modulo \"p\" defines an elliptic curve over the finite field F\"p\" (except for a finite number of primes \"p\", where the reduced curve has a singularity and thus fails to be elliptic, in which case \"E\" is said to be of bad reduction at \"p\").\nThe zeta function of an elliptic curve over a finite field F\"p\" is, in some sense, a generating function assembling the information of the number of points of \"E\" with values in the finite field extensions F\"pn\" of F\"p\". It is given by\nThe interior sum of the exponential resembles the development of the logarithm and, in fact, the so-defined zeta function is a rational function:\nwhere the 'trace of Frobenius' term formula_42 is defined to be the (negative of) the difference between the number of points on the elliptic curve formula_24 over formula_44 and the 'expected' number formula_45, viz.:\nThere are two points to note about this quantity. First, these formula_42 are not to be confused with the formula_39 in the definition of the curve formula_24 above: this is just an unfortunate clash of notation. Second, we may define the same quantities and functions over an arbitrary finite field of characteristic formula_50, with formula_51 replacing formula_50 everywhere.\nThe Hasse\u2013Weil zeta function of \"E\" over Q is then defined by collecting this information together, for all primes \"p\". It is defined by\nwhere \"\u03b5\"(\"p\") = 1 if \"E\" has good reduction at \"p\" and 0 otherwise (in which case \"ap\" is defined differently from the method above: see Silverman (1986) below).\nThis product converges for Re(\"s\") &gt; 3/2 only. Hasse's conjecture affirms that the \"L\"-function admits an analytic continuation to the whole complex plane and satisfies a functional equation relating, for any \"s\", \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") to \"L\"(\"E\", 2 \u2212 \"s\"). In 1999 this was shown to be a consequence of the proof of the Shimura\u2013Taniyama\u2013Weil conjecture, which asserts that every elliptic curve over \"Q\" is a modular curve, which implies that its \"L\"-function is the \"L\"-function of a modular form whose analytic continuation is known. One can therefore speak about the values of \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") at any complex number \"s\". \nThe \"Birch\u2013Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture\" relates the arithmetic of the curve to the behavior of its \"L\"-function at \"s\"\u00a0= 1. It affirms that the vanishing order of the \"L\"-function at \"s\"\u00a0= 1 equals the rank of \"E\" and predicts the leading term of the Laurent series of \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") at that point in terms of several quantities attached to the elliptic curve.\nMuch like the Riemann hypothesis, the truth of the BSD conjecture would have multiple consequences, including the following two:\nThe modularity theorem and its application to Fermat's Last Theorem.\nThe modularity theorem, once known as the Taniyama\u2013Shimura\u2013Weil conjecture, states that every elliptic curve \"E\" over Q is a modular curve, that is to say, its Hasse\u2013Weil zeta function is the \"L\"-function of a modular form of weight 2 and level \"N\", where \"N\" is the conductor of \"E\" (an integer divisible by the same prime numbers as the discriminant of \"E\", \u0394(\"E\")). In other words, if one writes the \"L\"-function for Re(\"s\") &gt; 3/2 in the form\nthen the expression\ndefines a parabolic modular newform of weight 2 and level \"N\". For prime numbers \"\u2113\" not dividing \"N\", the coefficient \"a\"(\"\u2113\") is equal to \"\u2113\" minus the number of solutions of the minimal equation of the curve modulo \"\u2113\".\nFor example, the elliptic curve formula_60, with discriminant (and conductor) 37, is associated to the form\nFor prime numbers \u2113 not equal to 37, one can verify the property about the coefficients. Thus, for \"\u2113\"\u00a0= 3, there are 6 solutions of the equation modulo 3: , , , , , ; thus .\nThe conjecture, going back to the 1950s, was completely proven by 1999 using ideas of Andrew Wiles, who proved it in 1994 for a large family of elliptic curves.\nThere are several formulations of the conjecture. Showing that they are equivalent was a main challenge of number theory in the second half of the 20th century. The modularity of an elliptic curve \"E\" of conductor \"N\" can be expressed also by saying that there is a non-constant rational map defined over Q, from the modular curve \"X\"0(\"N\") to \"E\". In particular, the points of \"E\" can be parametrized by modular functions.\nFor example, a modular parametrization of the curve formula_62 is given by\nwhere, as above, \"q\" = exp(2\u03c0\"iz\"). The functions \"x\"(\"z\") and \"y\"(\"z\") are modular of weight 0 and level 37; in other words they are meromorphic, defined on the upper half-plane Im(\"z\") &gt; 0 and satisfy\nand likewise for \"y\"(\"z\"), for all integers \"a, b, c, d\" with \"ad\" \u2212 \"bc\" = 1 and 37|\"c\".\nAnother formulation depends on the comparison of Galois representations attached on the one hand to elliptic curves, and on the other hand to modular forms. The latter formulation has been used in the proof of the conjecture. Dealing with the level of the forms (and the connection to the conductor of the curve) is particularly delicate.\nThe most spectacular application of the conjecture is the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem (FLT). Suppose that for a prime \"p\" \u2265 5, the Fermat equation\nhas a solution with non-zero integers, hence a counter-example to FLT. Then as Yves Hellegouarch was the first to notice, the elliptic curve\nof discriminant\ncannot be modular. Thus, the proof of the Taniyama\u2013Shimura\u2013Weil conjecture for this family of elliptic curves (called Hellegouarch\u2013Frey curves) implies FLT. The proof of the link between these two statements, based on an idea of Gerhard Frey (1985), is difficult and technical. It was established by Kenneth Ribet in 1987.\nIntegral points.\nThis section is concerned with points \"P\" = (\"x\", \"y\") of \"E\" such that \"x\" is an integer. The following theorem is due to C. L. Siegel: the set of points \"P\" = (\"x\", \"y\") of \"E\"(Q) such that \"x\" is an integer is finite. This theorem can be generalized to points whose \"x\" coordinate has a denominator divisible only by a fixed finite set of prime numbers.\nThe theorem can be formulated effectively. For example, if the Weierstrass equation of \"E\" has integer coefficients bounded by a constant \"H\", the coordinates (\"x\", \"y\") of a point of \"E\" with both \"x\" and \"y\" integer satisfy:\nThe Sato\u2013Tate conjecture is a statement about how the error term formula_69 in Hasse's theorem varies with the different primes \"q\", if an elliptic curve E over Q is reduced modulo q. It was proven (for almost all such curves) in 2006 due to the results of Taylor, Harris and Shepherd-Barron, and says that the error terms are equidistributed.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are notably applied in cryptography and for the factorization of large integers. These algorithms often make use of the group structure on the points of \"E\". Algorithms that are applicable to general groups, for example the group of invertible elements in finite fields, F*\"q\", can thus be applied to the group of points on an elliptic curve. For example, the discrete logarithm is such an algorithm. The interest in this is that choosing an elliptic curve allows for more flexibility than choosing \"q\" (and thus the group of units in F\"q\"). Also, the group structure of elliptic curves is generally more complicated.\nAlgorithms that use elliptic curves.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are used in some cryptographic applications as well as for integer factorization. Typically, the general idea in these applications is that a known algorithm which makes use of certain finite groups is rewritten to use the groups of rational points of elliptic curves. For more see also:\nReferences.\nSerge Lang, in the introduction to the book cited below, stated that \"It is possible to write endlessly on elliptic curves. (This is not a threat.)\" The following short list is thus at best a guide to the vast expository literature available on the theoretical, algorithmic, and cryptographic aspects of elliptic curves."}
{"id": "10229", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10229", "title": "Equidae", "text": "Equidae (sometimes known as the horse family) is the taxonomic family of horses and related animals, including the extant horses, donkeys, and zebras, and many other species known only from fossils. All extant species are in the genus \"Equus\", which originated in North America. Equidae belongs to the order Perissodactyla, which includes the extant tapirs and rhinoceros, and several extinct families.\nThe term equid refers to any member of this family, including any equine.\nEvolution.\nThe oldest known fossils assigned to Equidae were found in North America, and date from the early Eocene, 54 million years ago. They used to be assigned to the genus \"Hyracotherium\", but the type species of that genus now is regarded to be not a member of this family. The other species have been split off into different genera. These early equids were fox-sized animals with three toes on the hind feet, and four on the front feet. They were herbivorous browsers on relatively soft plants, and already adapted for running. The complexity of their brains suggest that they already were alert and intelligent animals. Later species reduced the number of toes, and developed teeth more suited for grinding up grasses and other tough plant food.\nThe equids, like other perissodactyls, are hindgut fermenters. They have evolved specialized teeth that cut and shear tough plant matter to accommodate their fibrous diet. Their seemingly inefficient digestion strategy is a result of their size at the time of its evolution, as they would have already had to be relatively large mammals to be supported on such a strategy.\nThe family became relatively diverse during the Miocene, with many new species appearing. By this time, equids were more truly horse-like, having developed the typical body shape of the modern animals. Many of these species bore the main weight of their bodies on their central, third, toe, with the others becoming reduced, and barely touching the ground, if at all. The sole surviving genus, \"Equus\", had evolved by the early Pleistocene, and spread rapidly through the world."}
{"id": "10231", "revid": "1012670934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10231", "title": "List of economists", "text": "This is an incomplete alphabetical list by surname of notable economists, experts in the social science of economics, past and present. For a history of economics, see the article History of economic thought. Only economists with biographical articles in Wikipedia are listed here."}
{"id": "10232", "revid": "18632153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10232", "title": "Empirical knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "10233", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10233", "title": "Encyclopedist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10235", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10235", "title": "ELIZA", "text": "ELIZA is an early natural language processing computer program created from 1964 to 1966 at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory by Joseph Weizenbaum. Created to demonstrate the superficiality of communication between humans and machines, Eliza simulated conversation by using a \"pattern matching\" and substitution methodology that gave users an illusion of understanding on the part of the program, but had no built in framework for contextualizing events. Directives on how to interact were provided by \"scripts\", written originally in MAD-Slip, which allowed ELIZA to process user inputs and engage in discourse following the rules and directions of the script. The most famous script, DOCTOR, simulated a Rogerian psychotherapist (in particular, Carl Rogers, who was well-known for simply parroting back at patients what they had just said),\nand used rules, dictated in the script, to respond with non-directional questions to user inputs. As such, ELIZA was one of the first chatterbots and one of the first programs capable of attempting the Turing test.\nELIZA's creator, Weizenbaum regarded the program as a method to show the superficiality of communication between man and machine, but was surprised by the number of individuals who attributed human-like feelings to the computer program, including Weizenbaum\u2019s secretary. Many academics believed that the program would be able to positively influence the lives of many people, particularly those suffering from psychological issues, and that it could aid doctors working on such patients' treatment. While ELIZA was capable of engaging in discourse, ELIZA could not converse with true understanding. However, many early users were convinced of ELIZA\u2019s intelligence and understanding, despite Weizenbaum\u2019s insistence to the contrary.\nOverview.\nJoseph Weizenbaum\u2019s ELIZA, running the DOCTOR script, was created to provide a parody of \"the responses of a non-directional psychotherapist in an initial psychiatric interview\" and to \"demonstrate that the communication between man and machine was superficial\". While ELIZA is best known for acting in the manner of a psychotherapist, the speech patterns are due to the data and instructions supplied by the DOCTOR script. ELIZA itself examined the text for keywords, applied values to said keywords, and transformed the input into an output; the script that ELIZA ran determined the keywords, set the values of keywords, and set the rules of transformation for the output. Weizenbaum chose to make the DOCTOR script in the context of psychotherapy to \"sidestep the problem of giving the program a data base of real-world knowledge\", as in a Rogerian therapeutic situation, the program had only to reflect back the patient's statements. The algorithms of DOCTOR allowed for a deceptively intelligent response, which deceived many individuals when first using the program.\nWeizenbaum named his program ELIZA after Eliza Doolittle, a working-class character in George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\". According to Weizenbaum, ELIZA's ability to be \"incrementally improved\" by various users made it similar to Eliza Doolittle, since Eliza Doolittle was taught to speak with an upper-class accent in Shaw's play. However, unlike in Shaw's play, ELIZA is incapable of learning new patterns of speech or new words through interaction alone. Edits must be made directly to ELIZA\u2019s active script in order to change the manner by which the program operates.\nWeizenbaum first implemented ELIZA in his own SLIP list-processing language, where, depending upon the initial entries by the user, the illusion of human intelligence could appear, or be dispelled through several interchanges. Some of ELIZA's responses were so convincing that Weizenbaum and several others have anecdotes of users becoming emotionally attached to the program, occasionally forgetting that they were conversing with a computer. Weizenbaum's own secretary reportedly asked Weizenbaum to leave the room so that she and ELIZA could have a real conversation. Weizenbaum was surprised by this, later writing: \"I had not realized\u00a0... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\"\nIn 1966, interactive computing (via a teletype) was new. It was 15 years before the personal computer became familiar to the general public, and three decades before most people encountered attempts at natural language processing in Internet services like Ask.com or PC help systems such as Microsoft Office Clippit. Although those programs included years of research and work, ELIZA remains a milestone simply because it was the first time a programmer had attempted such a human-machine interaction with the goal of creating the illusion (however brief) of human\u2013\"human\" interaction.\nAt the ICCC 1972 ELIZA was brought together with another early artificial-intelligence program named PARRY for a computer-only conversation. While ELIZA was built to speak as a doctor, PARRY was intended to simulate a patient with schizophrenia.\nDesign.\nWeizenbaum originally wrote ELIZA in MAD-Slip for the IBM 7094, as a program to make natural-language conversation possible with a computer. To accomplish this, Weizenbaum identified five \"fundamental technical problems\" for ELIZA to overcome: the identification of critical words, the discovery of a minimal context, the choice of appropriate transformations, the generation of responses appropriate to the transformation or in the absence of critical words and the provision of an ending capacity for ELIZA scripts. Weizenbaum solved these problems in his ELIZA program and made ELIZA such that it had no built-in contextual framework or universe of discourse. However, this required ELIZA to have a script of instructions on how to respond to inputs from users.\nELIZA starts its process of responding to an input by a user by first examining the text input for a \"keyword\". A \"keyword\" is a word designated as important by the acting ELIZA script, which assigns to each keyword a precedence number, or a RANK, designed by the programmer. If such words are found, they are put into a \"keystack\", with the keyword of the highest RANK at the top. The input sentence is then manipulated and transformed as the rule associated with the keyword of the highest RANK directs. For example, when the DOCTOR script encounters words such as \"alike\" or \"same\", it would output a message pertaining to similarity, in this case \u201cIn what way?\u201d, as these words had high precedence number. This also demonstrates how certain words, as dictated by the script, can be manipulated regardless of contextual considerations, such as switching first-person pronouns and second-person pronouns and vice versa, as these too had high precedence numbers. Such words with high precedence numbers are deemed superior to conversational patterns and are treated independently of contextual patterns.\nFollowing the first examination, the next step of the process is to apply an appropriate transformation rule, which includes two parts: the \"decomposition rule\" and the \"reassembly rule\". First, the input is reviewed for syntactical patterns in order to establish the minimal context necessary to respond. Using the keywords and other nearby words from the input, different disassembly rules are tested until an appropriate pattern is found. Using the script's rules, the sentence is then \"dismantled\" and arranged into sections of the component parts as the \"decomposition rule for the highest-ranking keyword\" dictates. The example that Weizenbaum gives is the input \"I are very helpful\" (remembering that \"I\" is \"You\" transformed), which is broken into (1) empty (2) \"I\" (3) \"are\" (4) \"very helpful\". The decomposition rule has broken the phrase into four small segments that contain both the keywords and the information in the sentence.\nThe decomposition rule then designates a particular reassembly rule, or set of reassembly rules, to follow when reconstructing the sentence. The reassembly rule takes the fragments of the input that the decomposition rule had created, rearranges them, and adds in programmed words to create a response. Using Weizenbaum's example previously stated, such a reassembly rule would take the fragments and apply them to the phrase \"What makes you think I am (4)\", which would result in \"What makes you think I am very helpful?\". This example is rather simple, since depending upon the disassembly rule, the output could be significantly more complex and use more of the input from the user. However, from this reassembly, ELIZA then sends the constructed sentence to the user in the form of text on the screen.\nThese steps represent the bulk of the procedures that ELIZA follows in order to create a response from a typical input, though there are several specialized situations that ELIZA/DOCTOR can respond to. One Weizenbaum specifically wrote about was when there is no keyword. One solution was to have ELIZA respond with a remark that lacked content, such as \"I see\" or \"Please go on\". The second method was to use a \"MEMORY\" structure, which recorded prior recent inputs, and would use these inputs to create a response referencing a part of the earlier conversation when encountered with no keywords. This was possible due to Slip\u2019s ability to tag words for other usage, which simultaneously allowed ELIZA to examine, store and repurpose words for usage in outputs.\nWhile these functions were all framed in ELIZA's programming, the exact manner by which the program dismantled, examined, and reassembled inputs is determined by the operating script. The script is not static and can be edited, or a new one created, as is necessary for the operation in the context needed. This would allow the program to be applied in multiple situations, including the well-known DOCTOR script, which simulates a Rogerian psychotherapist.\nWeizenbaum's original MAD-SLIP implementation was re-written in Lisp by Bernie Cosell. A BASIC version appeared in Creative Computing in 1977 (although it was written in 1973 by Jeff Shrager). This version, which was ported to many of the earliest personal computers, appears to have been subsequently translated into many other versions in many other languages.\nAnother version of Eliza popular among software engineers is the version that comes with the default release of GNU Emacs, and which can be accessed by typing codice_1 from most modern Emacs implementations.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1969, George Lucas and Walter Murch incorporated an Eliza-like dialogue interface in their screenplay for the feature film \"THX-1138\". Inhabitants of the underground future world of THX, when stressed, would retreat to \"confession booths\" and initiate a one-sided Eliza-formula conversation with a Jesus-faced computer who claimed to be \"Omm\".\nELIZA influenced a number of early computer games by demonstrating additional kinds of interface designs. Don Daglow wrote an enhanced version of the program called \"Ecala\" on a DEC PDP-10 minicomputer at Pomona College in 1973 before writing the computer role-playing game \"Dungeon\" (1975).\nELIZA is given credit as additional vocals on track 10 of the eponymous Information Society album.\nIn the 2008 anime RD Sennou Chousashitsu, aka \"Real Drive\", a character named Eliza Weizenbaum appears, an obvious tribute to ELIZA and Joseph Weizenbaum. Her behavior in the story often mimics the responses of the ELIZA program.\nThe 2011 video game \"\" features an artificial-intelligence Picus TV Network newsreader named Eliza Cassan.\nIn January 2018, the twelfth episode of the American sitcom \"Young Sheldon\" starred the protagonist \"conversing\" with ELIZA, hoping to resolve a domestic issue.\nOn July 19, 2018, ELIZA was in a brief mention by the protagonist of the movie \"Zoe\" to support his reasoning behind why his relationship with Zoe, a hyper-realistic AI, wasn't real.\nOn August 12, 2019, independent game developer Zachtronics published a visual novel called \"Eliza\", about an AI-based counseling service inspired by ELIZA.\nResponse and legacy.\nLay responses to ELIZA were disturbing to Weizenbaum and motivated him to write his book \"Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation\", in which he explains the limits of computers, as he wants to make clear his opinion that the anthropomorphic views of computers are just a reduction of the human being and any life form for that matter. In the independent documentary film \"Plug &amp; Pray\" (2010) Weizenbaum said that only people who misunderstood ELIZA called it a sensation.\nThe Israeli poet David Avidan, who was fascinated with future technologies and their relation to art, desired to explore the use of computers for writing literature. He conducted several conversations with an APL implementation of ELIZA and published them \u2013 in English, and in his own translation to Hebrew \u2013 under the title \"My Electronic Psychiatrist \u2013 Eight Authentic Talks with a Computer\". In the foreword he presented it as a form of constrained writing.\nThere are many programs based on ELIZA in different programming languages. In 1980 a company called \"Don't Ask Software\" created a version called \"Abuse\" for the Apple II, Atari, and Commodore 64 computers, which verbally abused the user based on the user's input. Other versions adapted ELIZA around a religious theme, such as ones featuring Jesus (both serious and comedic), and another Apple II variant called \"I Am Buddha\". The 1980 game \"The Prisoner\" incorporated ELIZA-style interaction within its gameplay. In 1988 the British artist and friend of Weizenbaum Brian Reffin Smith created two art-oriented ELIZA-style programs written in BASIC, one called \"Critic\" and the other \"Artist\", running on two separate Amiga 1000 computers and showed them at the exhibition \"Salamandre\" in the Mus\u00e9e du Berry, Bourges, France. The visitor was supposed to help them converse by typing in to \"Artist\" what \"Critic\" said, and vice versa. The secret was that the two programs were identical. GNU Emacs formerly had a codice_2 command that simulates a session between ELIZA and Zippy the Pinhead. The Zippyisms were removed due to copyright issues, but the DOCTOR program remains.\nELIZA has been referenced in popular culture and continues to be a source of inspiration for programmers and developers focused on artificial intelligence. It was also featured in a 2012 exhibit at Harvard University titled \"Go Ask A.L.I.C.E\", as part of a celebration of mathematician Alan Turing's 100th birthday. The exhibit explores Turing's lifelong fascination with the interaction between humans and computers, pointing to ELIZA as one of the earliest realizations of Turing's ideas."}
{"id": "10236", "revid": "88026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10236", "title": "ELIZA effect", "text": "The ELIZA effect, in computer science, is the tendency to unconsciously assume computer behaviors are analogous to human behaviors; that is, anthropomorphisation.\nOverview.\nIn its specific form, the ELIZA effect refers only to \"the susceptibility of people to read far more understanding than is warranted into strings of symbols\u2014especially words\u2014strung together by computers\". A trivial example of the specific form of the Eliza effect, given by Douglas Hofstadter, involves an automated teller machine which displays the words \"THANK YOU\" at the end of a transaction. A (very) casual observer might think that the machine is actually expressing gratitude; however, the machine is only printing a preprogrammed string of symbols.\nMore generally, the ELIZA effect describes any situation where, based solely on a system's output, users perceive computer systems as having \"intrinsic qualities and abilities which the software controlling the (output) cannot possibly achieve\" or \"assume that [outputs] reflect a greater causality than they actually do\". In both its specific and general forms, the ELIZA effect is notable for occurring even when users of the system are aware of the determinate nature of output produced by the system. From a psychological standpoint, the ELIZA effect is the result of a subtle cognitive dissonance between the user's awareness of programming limitations and their behavior towards the output of the program. The discovery of the ELIZA effect was an important development in artificial intelligence, demonstrating the principle of using social engineering rather than explicit programming to pass a Turing test.\nOrigin.\nThe effect is named for the 1966 chatterbot ELIZA, developed by MIT computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. When executing Weizenbaum's \"DOCTOR\" script, ELIZA parodied a Rogerian psychotherapist, largely by rephrasing the \"patients replies as questions:\nThough designed strictly as a mechanism to support \"natural language conversation\" with a computer, ELIZA's \"DOCTOR\" script was found to be surprisingly successful in eliciting emotional responses from users who, in the course of interacting with the program, began to ascribe understanding and motivation to the program's output. As Weizenbaum later wrote, \"I had not realized ... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\" Indeed, ELIZA's code had not been designed to evoke this reaction in the first place. Upon observation, researchers discovered users unconsciously assuming ELIZA's questions implied interest and emotional involvement in the topics discussed, \"even when they consciously knew that ELIZA did not simulate emotion\"."}
{"id": "10237", "revid": "33583391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10237", "title": "Exponentiation by squaring", "text": "In mathematics and computer programming, exponentiating by squaring is a general method for fast computation of large positive integer powers of a number, or more generally of an element of a semigroup, like a polynomial or a square matrix. Some variants are commonly referred to as square-and-multiply algorithms or binary exponentiation. These can be of quite general use, for example in modular arithmetic or powering of matrices. For semigroups for which additive notation is commonly used, like elliptic curves used in cryptography, this method is also referred to as double-and-add.\nBasic method.\nThe method is based on the observation that, for a positive integer \"n\", we have\nThis method uses the bits of the exponent to determine which powers are computed.\nThis example shows how to compute formula_2 using this method.\nThe exponent, 13, is 1101 in binary. The bits are used in left to right order.\nThe exponent has 4 bits, so there are 4 iterations.\nFirst, initialize the result to 1: formula_3.\nIf we write formula_12 in binary as formula_13, then this is equivalent to defining a sequence formula_14 by letting formula_15 and then defining formula_16 for formula_17, where formula_18 will equal formula_19.\nThis may be implemented as the following recursive algorithm: \n Function exp_by_squaring(x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then return exp_by_squaring(1 / x, -n);\n else if n = 0 then return 1;\n else if n = 1 then return x ;\n else if n is even then return exp_by_squaring(x * x, n / 2);\n else if n is odd then return x * exp_by_squaring(x * x, (n - 1) / 2);\nAlthough not tail-recursive, this algorithm may be rewritten into a tail recursive algorithm by introducing an auxiliary function:\n Function exp_by_squaring(x, n)\n return exp_by_squaring2(1, x, n)\n Function exp_by_squaring2(y, x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then return exp_by_squaring2(y, 1 / x, - n);\n else if n = 0 then return y;\n else if n = 1 then return x * y;\n else if n is even then return exp_by_squaring2(y, x * x, n / 2);\n else if n is odd then return exp_by_squaring2(x * y, x * x, (n - 1) / 2).\nA tail-recursive variant may also be constructed using a pair of accumulators instead of an auxiliary function as seen in the F# example below. The accumulators a1 and a2 can be thought of as storing the values formula_20 and formula_21 where i and j are initialized to 1 and 0 respectively. In the even case i is doubled, and in the odd case j is increased by i. The final result is formula_22 where formula_23.\nlet exp_by_squaring x n =\n let rec _exp x n' a1 a2 =\n if n' = 0 then 1\n elif n' = 1 then a1*a2\n elif n'%2 = 0 then _exp x (n'/2) (a1*a1) a2\n else _exp x (n'-1) a1 (a1*a2)\n _exp x n x 1\nThe iterative version of the algorithm also uses a bounded auxiliary space, and is given by\n Function exp_by_squaring_iterative(x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then\n x := 1 / x;\n n := -n;\n if n = 0 then return 1\n y := 1;\n while n &gt; 1 do\n if n is even then \n x := x * x;\n n := n / 2;\n else\n y := x * y;\n x := x * x;\n n := (n \u2013 1) / 2;\n return x * y\nComputational complexity.\nA brief analysis shows that such an algorithm uses formula_24 squarings and at most formula_24 multiplications, where formula_26 denotes the floor function. More precisely, the number of multiplications is one less than the number of ones present in the binary expansion of \"n\". For \"n\" greater than about 4 this is computationally more efficient than naively multiplying the base with itself repeatedly.\nEach squaring results in approximately double the number of digits of the previous, and so, if multiplication of two \"d\"-digit numbers is implemented in O(\"d\"\"k\") operations for some fixed \"k\", then the complexity of computing \"x\"\"n\" is given by\n2\"k\"-ary method.\nThis algorithm calculates the value of \"xn\" after expanding the exponent in base 2\"k\". It was first proposed by Brauer in 1939. In the algorithm below we make use of the following function \"f\"(0) = (\"k\",\u202f0) and \"f\"(\"m\") = (\"s\",\u202f\"u\"), where \"m\" = \"u\"\u00b72\"s\" with \"u\" odd.\nAlgorithm:\n y := 1; i := l - 1\n while i \u2265 0 do\n (s, u) := f(ni)\n for j := 1 to k - s do\n y := y2 \n y := y * xu\n for j := 1 to s do\n y := y2\n i := i - 1\n return y\nFor optimal efficiency, \"k\" should be the smallest integer satisfying\nSliding-window method.\nThis method is an efficient variant of the 2\"k\"-ary method. For example, to calculate the exponent 398, which has binary expansion (110 001 110)2, we take a window of length 3 using the 2\"k\"-ary method algorithm and calculate 1, x3, x6, x12, x24, x48, x49, x98, x99, x198, x199, x398. \nBut, we can also compute 1, x3, x6, x12, x24, x48, x96, x192, x198, x199, x398, which saves one multiplication and amounts to evaluating (110 001 110)2\nHere is the general algorithm:\nAlgorithm:\nAlgorithm:\n y := 1; i := l - 1\n while i &gt; -1 do\n if ni = 0 then\n y := y2' i := i - 1\n else\n while ns = 0 do\n s := s + 1\n for h := 1 to i - s + 1 do\n y := y2\n u := (ni, ni-1, ..., ns)2\n y := y * xu\n i := s - 1\n return y\nMontgomery's ladder technique.\nMany algorithms for exponentiation do not provide defence against side-channel attacks. Namely, an attacker observing the sequence of squarings and multiplications can (partially) recover the exponent involved in the computation. This is a problem if the exponent should remain secret, as with many public-key cryptosystems. A technique called \"Montgomery's ladder\" addresses this concern.\nGiven the binary expansion of a positive, non-zero integer \"n\" = (\"n\"\"k\"\u22121...\"n\"0)2 with \"n\"k\u22121 = 1, we can compute \"xn\" as follows:\n x1 = x; x2 = x2\n for i = k - 2 to 0 do\n If ni = 0 then\n x2 = x1 * x2; x1 = x12\n else\n x1 = x1 * x2; x2 = x22\n return x1\nThe algorithm performs a fixed sequence of operations (up to log\u202f\"n\"): a multiplication and squaring takes place for each bit in the exponent, regardless of the bit's specific value. A similar algorithm for multiplication by doubling exists.\nThis specific implementation of Montgomery's ladder is not yet protected against cache timing attacks: memory access latencies might still be observable to an attacker, as different variables are accessed depending on the value of bits of the secret exponent. Modern cryptographic implementations use a \"scatter\" technique to make sure the processor always misses the faster cache.\nFixed-base exponent.\nThere are several methods which can be employed to calculate \"xn\" when the base is fixed and the exponent varies. As one can see, precomputations play a key role in these algorithms.\nYao's method.\nYao's method is orthogonal to the -ary method where the exponent is expanded in radix and the computation is as performed in the algorithm above. Let , , , and be integers.\nLet the exponent be written as\nwhere formula_32 for all formula_33.\nLet .\nThen the algorithm uses the equality\nGiven the element of , and the exponent written in the above form, along with the precomputed values , the element is calculated using the algorithm below:\n y = 1, u = 1, j = h - 1\n while j &gt; 0 do\n for i = 0 to w - 1 do\n if ni = j then\n u = u \u00d7 xbi\n y = y \u00d7 u\n j = j - 1\n return y\nIf we set and , then the values are simply the digits of in base . Yao's method collects in \"u\" first those that appear to the highest power ; in the next round those with power are collected in as well etc. The variable \"y\" is multiplied times with the initial , times with the next highest powers, and so on.\nThe algorithm uses multiplications, and elements must be stored to compute .\nEuclidean method.\nThe Euclidean method was first introduced in \"Efficient exponentiation using precomputation and vector addition chains\" by P.D Rooij.\nThis method for computing formula_19 in group , where is a natural integer, whose algorithm is given below, is using the following equality recursively:\nwhere formula_37.\nIn other words, a Euclidean division of the exponent by is used to return a quotient and a rest .\nGiven the base element in group , and the exponent formula_12 written as in Yao's method, the element formula_19 is calculated using formula_40 precomputed values formula_41 and then the algorithm below.\n Begin loop \n \n Break loop \n \n End loop;\nThe algorithm first finds the largest value among the and then the supremum within the set of .\nThen it raises to the power , multiplies this value with , and then assigns the result of this computation and the value modulo .\nFurther applications.\nThe same idea allows fast computation of large exponents modulo a number. Especially in cryptography, it is useful to compute powers in a ring of integers modulo \"q\". It can also be used to compute integer powers in a group, using the rule\nThe method works in every semigroup and is often used to compute powers of matrices.\nFor example, the evaluation of\nwould take a very long time and much storage space if the na\u00efve method were used: compute 13789722341, then take the remainder when divided by 2345. Even using a more effective method will take a long time: square 13789, take the remainder when divided by 2345, multiply the result by 13789, and so on. This will take less than formula_42 modular multiplications.\nApplying above \"exp-by-squaring\" algorithm, with \"*\" interpreted as \"x\"\u00a0*\u00a0\"y\" = \"xy\" mod 2345 (that is, a multiplication followed by a division with remainder) leads to only 27 multiplications and divisions of integers, which may all be stored in a single machine word.\nSigned-digit recoding.\nIn certain computations it may be more efficient to allow negative coefficients and hence use the inverse of the base, provided inversion in is \"fast\" or has been precomputed. For example, when computing , the binary method requires multiplications and squarings. However, one could perform squarings to get and then multiply by to obtain .\nTo this end we define the signed-digit representation of an integer in radix as \n\"Signed binary representation\" corresponds to the particular choice and formula_44. It is denoted by formula_45. There are several methods for computing this representation. The representation is not unique. For example, take : two distinct signed-binary representations are given by formula_46 and formula_47, where formula_48 is used to denote . Since the binary method computes a multiplication for every non-zero entry in the base-2 representation of , we are interested in finding the signed-binary representation with the smallest number of non-zero entries, that is, the one with \"minimal\" Hamming weight. One method of doing this is to compute the representation in non-adjacent form, or NAF for short, which is one that satisfies formula_49 and denoted by formula_50. For example, the NAF representation of 478 is formula_51. This representation always has minimal Hamming weight. A simple algorithm to compute the NAF representation of a given integer formula_52 with formula_53 is the following:\n for to do\n \nAnother algorithm by Koyama and Tsuruoka does not require the condition that formula_54; it still minimizes the Hamming weight.\nAlternatives and generalizations.\nExponentiation by squaring can be viewed as a suboptimal addition-chain exponentiation algorithm: it computes the exponent by an addition chain consisting of repeated exponent doublings (squarings) and/or incrementing exponents by \"one\" (multiplying by \"x\") only. More generally, if one allows \"any\" previously computed exponents to be summed (by multiplying those powers of \"x\"), one can sometimes perform the exponentiation using fewer multiplications (but typically using more memory). The smallest power where this occurs is for \"n\" = 15:\nIn general, finding the \"optimal\" addition chain for a given exponent is a hard problem, for which no efficient algorithms are known, so optimal chains are typically only used for small exponents (e.g. in compilers where the chains for small powers have been pre-tabulated). However, there are a number of heuristic algorithms that, while not being optimal, have fewer multiplications than exponentiation by squaring at the cost of additional bookkeeping work and memory usage. Regardless, the number of multiplications never grows more slowly than \u0398(log \"n\"), so these algorithms only improve asymptotically upon exponentiation by squaring by a constant factor at best."}
{"id": "10238", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10238", "title": "Exon", "text": "An exon is any part of a gene that will encode a part of the final mature RNA produced by that gene after introns have been removed by RNA splicing. The term \"exon\" refers to both the DNA sequence within a gene and to the corresponding sequence in RNA transcripts. In RNA splicing, introns are removed and exons are covalently joined to one another as part of generating the mature messenger RNA. Just as the entire set of genes for a species constitutes the genome, the entire set of exons constitutes the exome.\nHistory.\nThe term \"exon\" derives from the expressed region and was coined by American biochemist Walter Gilbert in 1978: \"The notion of the cistron\u2026 must be replaced by that of a transcription unit containing regions which will be lost from the mature messengerwhich I suggest we call introns (for intragenic regions)alternating with regions which will be expressedexons.\"\nThis definition was originally made for protein-coding transcripts that are spliced before being translated. The term later came to include sequences removed from rRNA and tRNA, and it also was used later for RNA molecules originating from different parts of the genome that are then ligated by trans-splicing.\nContribution to genomes and size distribution.\nAlthough unicellular eukaryotes such as yeast have either no introns or very few, metazoans and especially vertebrate genomes have a large fraction of non-coding DNA. For instance, in the human genome only 1.1% of the genome is spanned by exons, whereas 24% is in introns, with 75% of the genome being intergenic DNA. This can provide a practical advantage in omics-aided health care (such as precision medicine) because it makes commercialized whole exome sequencing a smaller and less expensive challenge than commercialized whole genome sequencing. The large variation in genome size and C-value across life forms has posed an interesting challenge called the C-value enigma.\nAcross all eukaryotic genes in GenBank, there were (in 2002), on average, 5.48 exons per gene. The average exon encoded 30-36 amino acids. While the longest exon in the human genome is 11555 bp long, several exons have been found to be only 2 bp long. A single-nucleotide exon has been reported from the \"Arabidopsis\" genome.\nStructure and function.\nIn protein-coding genes, the exons include both the protein-coding sequence and the 5\u2032- and 3\u2032-untranslated regions (UTR). Often the first exon includes both the 5\u2032-UTR and the first part of the coding sequence, but exons containing only regions of 5\u2032-UTR or (more rarely) 3\u2032-UTR occur in some genes, i.e. the UTRs may contain introns. Some non-coding RNA transcripts also have exons and introns.\nMature mRNAs originating from the same gene need not include the same exons, since different introns in the pre-mRNA can be removed by the process of alternative splicing.\nExonization is the creation of a new exon, as a result of mutations in introns.\nExperimental approaches using exons.\nExon trapping or 'gene trapping' is a molecular biology technique that exploits the existence of the intron-exon splicing to find new genes. The first exon of a 'trapped' gene splices into the exon that is contained in the insertional DNA. This new exon contains the ORF for a reporter gene that can now be expressed using the enhancers that control the target gene. A scientist knows that a new gene has been trapped when the reporter gene is expressed.\nSplicing can be experimentally modified so that targeted exons are excluded from mature mRNA transcripts by blocking the access of splice-directing small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) to pre-mRNA using Morpholino antisense oligos. This has become a standard technique in developmental biology. Morpholino oligos can also be targeted to prevent molecules that regulate splicing (e.g. splice enhancers, splice suppressors) from binding to pre-mRNA, altering patterns of splicing."}
{"id": "10239", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10239", "title": "Exxon", "text": "Exxon is the brand name of the oil and natural resources company Exxon Corporation which was, prior to 1972, known as Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. In 1999, Exxon Corporation merged with Mobil to form ExxonMobil. The \"Exxon\" brand is still used by ExxonMobil's downstream operations as a brand for certain gas stations, motor fuel and related products (the highest concentration of which are located in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Texas and in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern states). Standard Oil Company of New Jersey was one of the Seven Sisters that dominated the global petroleum industry from the mid-1940s to the 1970s.\nHistory.\nExxon replaced the Esso, Enco, and Humble brands in the United States in 1973. The Esso name was a trademark of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and attracted protests from other Standard Oil spinoffs because of its phonetic similarity to the acronym of the name of the parent company, Standard Oil. As a result, Standard Oil Company of New Jersey was restricted from using Esso in the U.S., except in those states awarded to it in the 1911 Standard Oil antitrust settlement.\nIn states where it was restricted from using the Esso name, the company marketed under the Humble or Enco brands. The Humble brand was used at Texas stations for decades, as those operations were under the direction of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey affiliate Humble Oil &amp; Refining Company. In the middle to late 1950s, the use of the Humble brand spread to other southwestern states, including Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma.\nIn 1959, Standard Oil Company of New Jersey secured full control of Humble Oil and restructured it into its U.S. marketing and refining division, to market nationwide under the Enco, Esso, and Humble brands. Enco was created as an acronym for the phrase \"Energy Company\". Humble introduced the Enco brand in 1960 in Oklahoma and surrounding states, to replace Humble's subsidiary Oklahoma and Pate brands. Humble also tried marketing under Enco in Ohio, but Standard Oil Company of Ohio (Sohio) protested that the Enco name and logo (a white oval with a blue border and red lettering) too closely resembled that of Esso. Consequently, stations in Ohio were rebranded as Humble and remained so until the Exxon brand came into use.\nAfter the Enco brand was discontinued in Ohio, it was moved to other non-Esso states. In 1961, Humble stations in Arizona, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas were rebranded to Enco. That same year, Enco appeared on former Carter stations in the Midwest and the Pacific Northwest.\nIn 1963, Humble Oil and Tidewater Oil Company began negotiating a sale of Tidewater's West Coast refining and marketing operations. The sale would have given Humble Oil many existing Flying A stations and distributorships, as well as a refinery in California, the nation's fastest-growing gasoline market. However, the Justice Department objected to the sale on anti-trust grounds. (In 1966, Phillips Petroleum Company bought Tidewater's western properties and rebranded all Flying A outlets to Phillips 66.)\nHumble Oil continued to expand its West Coast operations, adding California to its marketing territory, building many new Enco stations, and rebranding others. In 1967, Humble Oil purchased all remaining Signal stations from Standard Oil Company of California (Chevron) and rebranded them as Enco outlets, greatly increasing Enco's presence in California. Finally, in 1969, Humble Oil opened a new refinery in Benicia, California.\nIn 1966, the U.S. Justice Department ordered Humble Oil to \"cease and desist\" from using the Esso brand at stations in several southeastern states, following protests from Standard Oil of Kentucky (Kyso), which was a Standard Oil of California subsidiary in the process of rebranding its Standard stations to Chevron. By 1967, Humble Oil's Esso stations in the Southeast were rebranded to Enco.\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, Humble Oil continued to have difficulties promoting itself as a nationwide marketer of petroleum products, despite a number of high-profile marketing strategies. These included the popular \"Put a Tiger in Your Tank\" advertising campaign and accompanying tiger mascot created by American illustrator Bob Jones, to promote Enco Extra and Esso Extra gasolines. Humble Oil also used similar logotypes, use of the Humble name in all Enco and Esso advertising, and uniform designs for all stations regardless of brand. In addition, Humble Oil was a major promoter and broadcast sponsor for college football in the Pacific-8 (now Pac-12) and Southwestern conferences.\nBut Humble Oil still faced stiff competition from national brands such as Shell and Texaco, which at that time was the only company to market under one brand name in all 50 states. By the late 1960s, Humble officials realized that the time had come to develop a new brand name that could be used nationwide.\nAt first, consideration was given to simply rebranding all stations as Enco, but that was shelved when it was learned that the word \"Enco\" is similar in pronunciation to the Japanese slang term \"enko\", meaning \"stalled car\" (an abbreviation of \"enjin no kosho\", \"engine breakdown\").\nIn 1972, Exxon was unveiled as the new, unified brand name for all former Enco and Esso outlets. At the same time, the company changed its corporate name from Standard Oil of New Jersey to Exxon Corporation. The rebranding came after successful test-marketing of the Exxon name, under two experimental logos, in the fall and winter of 1971\u20131972. Along with the new name, Exxon settled on a rectangular logo using red lettering and blue trim on a white background, similar to the familiar color scheme on the old Enco and Esso logos.\nThe company initially planned to change its name to \"Exon\", in keeping with the four-letter format of Enco and Esso. However, during the planning process, it was noted that James Exon was the governor of Nebraska. Renaming the company after a sitting governor seemed ill-advised. George T. Piercy, a senior member of the board of directors suggested adding an X resulting in the new EXXON name.\nThe unrestricted international use of the popular Esso brand prompted Exxon to continue using it outside the U.S. Esso is the only widely used Standard Oil descendant brand left in existence. Others, such as Chevron, maintain a few Standard-branded stations in specific states in order to retain their trademarks, and prevent others from using them.\nOn March 24, 1989, in what is regarded as one of the worst oil spills in American history, a tanker owned by Exxon, the Exxon Valdez, crashed into Bligh Reef, spilling its cargo of over ten million gallons of crude oil into the Prince William Sound in Alaska and causing the deaths of hundreds of thousands of seabirds and sea mammals. The ship was piloted by a captain with a history of drunk driving convictions, and Exxon was ordered by a jury to pay punitive damages in the amount of $5 billion. This judgment was eventually reduced, after multiple appeals, to just $500 million by 2008.\nAs a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, in July 2020, Exxon announced deep spending and job position cuts in order to save an 8% shareholder dividend. According to Reifinitiv Eikon data, the company experienced $2.63 billion loss and their shares were down by 35%. Later in October 2020, Exxon released a statement which expanded on the planned cuts, stating that 15 percent of the company's global workforce would be fired over the next two years, including layoffs of 1,900 U.S. jobs, reducing the total global workforce by 14,000 employees. In February 2021, Exxon announced that in 2020 it registered a lost of $22.4 billion adding that it was planning to invest $ 3 billion in the next 4 years. \nExxon Office Systems.\nUnder the guidance of its paid consultants at Boston Consulting Group, Exxon announced in the 1970s that it would compete against IBM and Xerox. The mantra was \u2018Information Is the Oil of the 21st Century\u2019. It launched Exxon Office Systems, which predictably failed, since \"the giant oil company failed to fully realize the subtleties of managing small high-tech companies.\" In the early 1980s, Exxon retailed its fax machines and software through Sears. Exxon announced the closure of the venture at the end of 1984.\nRecent years.\nIn 1989, Exxon announced that it was moving its headquarters, including about 300 employees, from Manhattan, New York City to the Las Colinas area of Irving, Texas. Exxon sold the Exxon Building (1251 Avenue of the Americas), its former headquarters in Rockefeller Center, to a unit of Mitsui Real Estate Development Co. Ltd. in 1986 for $610 million. John Walsh, president of Exxon subsidiary Friendswood Development Company, stated that Exxon left New York because the costs were too high. In 2009 Exxon partnered with Turner Ridge Capital Management to develop and finance their U.S. alternative energy infrastructure.\nIn 2016, ExxonMobil successfully asked a U.S. federal court to lift the aforementioned trademark injunction that banned it from using the Esso brand in various states. By this time, as a result of numerous mergers and rebranding, the remaining Standard Oil companies that previously objected to the Esso name had been acquired by BP. ExxonMobil cited trademark surveys in which there was no longer possible confusion with the Esso name as it was more than seven decades before. BP also had no objection to lifting the ban. ExxonMobil did not specify whether they would now open new stations in the U.S. under the Esso name; they were primarily concerned about the additional expenses of having separate marketing, letterheads, packaging, and other materials that omit \"Esso\".\nLogo.\nThe rectangular Exxon logo, with the blue strip at the bottom and red lettering with the two 'X's interlinked together, was designed by noted industrial stylist Raymond Loewy. The interlinked 'X's are incorporated in the modern-day ExxonMobil corporate logo; in mid-2016, as part of a corporate rebranding accompanying the launch of ExxonMobil's \"Synergy\" fuel products, the mixed-case Exxon wordmark from the ExxonMobil corporate logo became the brand's main logo.\nIn 1985, Minolta introduced an autofocus SLR camera system named \"Maxxum\" in the United States. Originally, cameras (such as the Maxxum 7000) lenses and flashes used a logo with the X's crossed in 'MAXXUM'. Exxon considered this a violation of their trademark, and as a result, Minolta was allowed to distribute cameras already produced, but was forced to change the stylistic 'XX' and implement this as a change in new production. ExxonMobil similarly sued 21st Century Fox over its cable channel FXX, but the parties agreed to dismiss the suit in October 2015.\nBranding.\nExxon is ExxonMobil's primary retail gasoline brand in most of the United States, with the highest concentration of retail outlets located in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Texas, and in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern states. The Exxon brand also has a market presence in the following metropolitan areas:\nMobil is the company's primary retail gasoline brand in California, Florida, New York, New England, the Great Lakes, and the Midwest. Esso is ExxonMobil's primary gasoline brand worldwide except in Australia, Guam, Mexico, Nigeria, and New Zealand, where the Mobil brand is used exclusively. In Colombia, Canada, and Egypt, as well as formerly Japan and Malaysia, both the Esso and Mobil brands are used, in which the latter was rebranded as Petron in 2013, and ENEOS for the former in 2019, respectively. The Mobil brand is applied to each Esso fuel tanks in Hong Kong and Singapore."}
{"id": "10243", "revid": "1012856475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10243", "title": "Exxon Valdez oil spill", "text": "The \"Exxon Valdez\" oil spill occurred in Prince William Sound, Alaska, March 24, 1989, when the \"Exxon Valdez\", an oil tanker owned by Exxon Shipping Company, bound for Long Beach, California, struck Prince William Sound's Bligh Reef, west of Tatitlek, Alaska, at 12:04\u00a0a.m. and spilled (or 37,000 tonnes) of crude oil over the next few days. It is considered the worst oil spill worldwide in terms of damage to the environment. The \"Valdez\" spill is the second largest in US waters, after the 2010 \"Deepwater Horizon\" oil spill, in terms of volume released. Prince William Sound's remote location, accessible only by helicopter, plane, or boat, made government and industry response efforts difficult and severely taxed existing response plans. The region is a habitat for salmon, sea otters, seals, and seabirds. The oil, originally extracted at the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field, eventually affected of coastline, of which were heavily or moderately oiled.\nSpill.\nThe ship was carrying of oil, of which about were spilled into the Prince William Sound.\nMultiple factors have been identified as contributing to the incident:\nCaptain Joseph Hazelwood, who was widely reported to have been drinking heavily that night, was not at the controls when the ship struck the reef. Exxon blamed Captain Hazelwood for the grounding of the tanker, but, Hazelwood accused the corporation of making him a scapegoat. As the senior officer in command of the ship, he was accused of being intoxicated and thereby contributing to the disaster, but he was cleared of this charge at his 1990 trial after witnesses testified that he was sober around the time of the accident . Writer Greg Palast stated in 2008, \"Forget the drunken skipper fable. As to Captain Joe Hazelwood, he was below decks, sleeping off his bender. At the helm, the third mate may never have collided with Bligh Reef had he looked at his RAYCAS radar. But the radar was not turned on. In fact, the tanker's radar was left broken and disabled for more than a year before the disaster, and Exxon management knew it. It was just too expensive to fix and operate.\" However, though Greg Palast's article (which is also embellished with specific reference to somewhat mysterious perhaps colloquially named \u201crubber and sucker\u201d systems, and, ambiguous diction where it references the acronym \u201cBP\u201d in terms of its relationship to British Petroleum) tells us to \u201cForget the drunken skipper fable\u201d, and, whether or not directly relevant to the circumstances of the disaster in terms of the extent of Hazelwood's direct involvement, Bill Meyer in his U.S. News article which includes references to an interview with Hazelwood claims that \u201c(Hazelwood) doesn't say much about the actual grounding, which occurred just after midnight on March 24, 1989\u201d, though of Hazelwood's trip ashore, approximately 12 hours before the accident, he says Hazelwood reported that \u201cafter lunch, we had a couple of drinks\u201d. Of the culture in play at the time it is perhaps reasonable to ask : \u201cwhy, if (as Greg Palast suggests they might have) the Captain and ship\u2019s officers had knowledge of the absence of functioning radar and cleanup systems, did the ship set sail with them collectively at the helm in the first place, whatever the specifics in terms of who\u2019s watch?\u201d.\nOther factors, according to an MIT course entitled \"Software System Safety\" by Professor Nancy G. Leveson, included:\nThis disaster resulted in International Maritime Organization introducing comprehensive marine pollution prevention rules (MARPOL) through various conventions. The rules were ratified by member countries and, under International Ship Management rules, the ships are being operated with a common objective of \"safer ships and cleaner oceans.\" \nIn 2009, \"Exxon Valdez\" Captain Joseph Hazelwood offered a \"heartfelt apology\" to the people of Alaska, suggesting he had been wrongly blamed for the disaster: \"The true story is out there for anybody who wants to look at the facts, but that's not the sexy story and that's not the easy story,\" he said. Hazelwood said he felt Alaskans always gave him a fair shake.\nClean-up and major effects.\nChemical dispersant, a surfactant and solvent mixture, was applied to the slick by a private company on March 24 with a helicopter, but the helicopter missed the target area. Scientific data on its toxicity were either thin or incomplete. In addition, public acceptance of new, widespread chemical treatment was lacking. Landowners, fishing groups, and conservation organizations questioned the use of chemicals on hundreds of miles of shoreline when other alternatives may have been available.\"\nAccording to a report by David Kirby for TakePart, the main component of the Corexit formulation used during cleanup, 2-butoxyethanol, was identified as \"one of the agents that caused liver, kidney, lung, nervous system, and blood disorders among cleanup crews in Alaska following the 1989 \"Exxon Valdez\" spill.\nMechanical cleanup was started shortly afterwards using booms and skimmers, but the skimmers were not readily available during the first 24 hours following the spill, and thick oil and kelp tended to clog the equipment. Despite civilian insistence for a complete clean, only 10% of total oil was actually completely cleaned. Exxon was widely criticized for its slow response to cleaning up the disaster and John Devens, the mayor of Valdez, has said his community felt betrayed by Exxon's inadequate response to the crisis. More than 11,000 Alaska residents, along with some Exxon employees, worked throughout the region to try to restore the environment. \nBecause Prince William Sound contained many rocky coves where the oil collected, the decision was made to displace it with high-pressure hot water. However, this also displaced and destroyed the microbial populations on the shoreline; many of these organisms (e.g. plankton) are the basis of the coastal marine food chain, and others (e.g. certain bacteria and fungi) are capable of facilitating the biodegradation of oil. At the time, both scientific advice and public pressure was to clean everything, but since then, a much greater understanding of natural and facilitated remediation processes has developed, due somewhat in part to the opportunity presented for study by the \"Exxon Valdez\" spill. Despite the extensive cleanup attempts, less than ten percent of the oil was recovered.\nBoth the long-term and short-term effects of the oil spill have been studied. Immediate effects included the deaths of 100,000 to as many as 250,000 seabirds, at least 2,800 sea otters, approximately 12 river otters, 300 harbor seals, 247 bald eagles, and 22 orcas, and an unknown number of salmon and herring.\nAlthough the volume of oil has declined considerably with oil remaining only about 0.14\u20130.28% of the original spilled volume, studies suggest the area of oiled beach has changed little since 1992. A study by the National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA in Juneau, determined that by 2001 approximately 90 tonnes of oil remained on beaches in Prince William Sound in the sandy soil of the contaminated shoreline, with annual loss rates declining from 68% per year prior to 1992, to 4% per year after 2001.\nThe remaining oil lasting far longer than anticipated has resulted in more long-term losses of species than had been expected. Laboratory experiments found that at levels as low as one part per billion, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are toxic for salmon and herring eggs. Species as diverse as sea otters, harlequin ducks and orcas suffered immediate and long-term losses. Oiled mussel beds and other tidal shoreline habitats may take up to 30 years to recover.\nExxonMobil denied concerns over remaining oil, stating that they anticipated the remaining fraction would not cause long-term ecological impacts. According to the conclusions of ExxonMobil's study: \"We've done 350 peer-reviewed studies of Prince William Sound, and those studies conclude that Prince William Sound has recovered, it's healthy and it's thriving.\"\nOn March 24, 2014, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the spill, NOAA scientists reported that some species seem to have recovered, with the sea otter the latest creature to return to pre-spill numbers. Scientists who have monitored the spill area for the last 25 years report that concern remains for one of two pods of local orca whales, with fears that one pod may eventually die out. Federal scientists estimate that between 16,000 and 21,000 US gallons (61 to 79 m3) of oil remains on beaches in Prince William Sound and up to 450 miles (725\u00a0km) away. Some of the oil does not appear to have biodegraded at all. A USGS scientist who analyses the remaining oil along the coastline states that it remains among rocks and between tide marks. \"The oil mixes with seawater and forms an emulsion...Left out, the surface crusts over but the inside still has the consistency of mayonnaise \u2013 or mousse.\" Alaska state senator Berta Gardner is urging Alaskan politicians to demand that the US government force ExxonMobil to pay the final $92\u00a0million (\u00a357\u00a0million) still owed from the court settlement. The major part of the money would be spent to finish cleaning up oiled beaches and attempting to restore the crippled herring population.\nLitigation and cleanup costs.\nIn October 1989, Exxon filed suit against the State of Alaska, charging that the state had interfered with Exxon's attempts to clean up the spill by refusing to approve the use of dispersant chemicals until the night of the 26th. The state disputed the claim, stating that there was a long-standing agreement to allow the use of dispersants to clean up spills, thus Exxon did not require permission to use them, and that in fact Exxon had not had enough dispersant on hand to effectively handle a spill of the size created by the \"Valdez\". Exxon filed claims in October 1990 against the Coast Guard, asking to be reimbursed for cleanup costs and damages awarded to plaintiffs in any lawsuits filed by the State of Alaska or the federal government against Exxon. The company claimed that the Coast Guard was \"wholly or partially responsible\" for the spill, because they had granted mariners' licenses to the crew of the Valdez, and because they had given the \"Valdez\" permission to leave regular shipping lanes to avoid ice. They also reiterated the claim that the Coast Guard had delayed cleanup by refusing to give permission to immediately use chemical dispersants on the spill.\nAlso, in 1991, Exxon made a quiet, separate financial settlement of damages with a group of seafood producers known as the Seattle Seven for the disaster's effect on the Alaskan seafood industry. The agreement granted $63.75\u00a0million to the Seattle Seven, but stipulated that the seafood companies would have to repay almost all of any punitive damages awarded in other civil proceedings. The $5\u00a0billion in punitive damages was awarded later, and the Seattle Seven's share could have been as high as $750\u00a0million if the damages award had held. Other plaintiffs have objected to this secret arrangement, and when it came to light, Judge Holland ruled that Exxon should have told the jury at the start that an agreement had already been made, so the jury would know exactly how much Exxon would have to pay.\nIn the case of \"Exxon v. Baker\", an Anchorage jury awarded $287\u00a0million for actual damages and $5\u00a0billion for punitive damages. To protect itself in case the judgment was affirmed, Exxon obtained a $4.8\u00a0billion credit line from J.P. Morgan &amp; Co., who created the first modern credit default swap so that they would not have to hold as much money in reserve against the risk of Exxon's default.\nMeanwhile, Exxon appealed the ruling, and the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ordered the trial judge, Russel Holland, to reduce the punitive damages. On December 6, 2002, Holland announced that he had reduced the damages to $4\u00a0billion, which he concluded was justified by the facts of the case and was not grossly excessive. Exxon appealed again and the case returned to Holland to be reconsidered in light of a recent Supreme Court ruling in a similar case. Holland increased the punitive damages to $4.5\u00a0billion, plus interest.\nAfter more appeals, in December 2006 the damages award was cut to $2.5\u00a0billion. The court of appeals cited recent Supreme Court rulings relative to limits on punitive damages.\nExxon appealed again. On May 23, 2007, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals denied ExxonMobil's request for a third hearing and let stand its ruling that Exxon owed $2.5\u00a0billion in punitive damages. Exxon then appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case. On February 27, 2008, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments. Justice Samuel Alito, who at the time owned between $100,000 and $250,000 in Exxon stock, recused himself from the case. In a decision issued June 25, 2008, written by Justice David Souter, the court vacated the $2.5\u00a0billion award and remanded the case back to the lower court, finding that the damages were excessive with respect to maritime common law. Exxon's actions were deemed \"worse than negligent but less than malicious.\" The punitive damages were further reduced to an amount of $507.5\u00a0million. The Court's ruling was that maritime punitive damages should not exceed the compensatory damages, supported by a precedent dating from 1818. Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy has decried the ruling as \"another in a line of cases where this Supreme Court has misconstrued congressional intent to benefit large corporations.\"\nExxon's official position was that punitive damages greater than $25\u00a0million were not justified because the spill resulted from an accident, and because Exxon spent an estimated $2\u00a0billion cleaning up the spill and a further $1\u00a0billion to settle related civil and criminal charges. Attorneys for the plaintiffs contended that Exxon bore responsibility for the accident because the company \"put a drunk in charge of a tanker in Prince William Sound.\" Exxon recovered a significant portion of clean-up and legal expenses through insurance claims associated with the grounding of the \"Exxon Valdez\".\nAs of December 15, 2009, Exxon had paid the entire $507.5\u00a0million in punitive damages, including lawsuit costs, plus interest, which were further distributed to thousands of plaintiffs.\nPolitical consequences and reforms.\nThe Oil Spill Recovery Institute was formed after United States Congress approved it to seek a solution. Collaborating with InnoCentive they found a partial solution for the flow of oil.\nCoast Guard report.\nA report by the U.S. National Response Center summarized the event and made a number of recommendations, such as changes to the work patterns of Exxon crew in order to address the causes of the accident.\nOil Pollution Act of 1990.\nIn response to the spill, the United States Congress passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA). The legislation included a clause that prohibits any vessel that, after March 22, 1989, has caused an oil spill of more than in any marine area, from operating in Prince William Sound.\nIn April 1998, the company argued in a legal action against the Federal government that the ship should be allowed back into Alaskan waters. Exxon claimed OPA was effectively a bill of attainder, a regulation that was unfairly directed at Exxon alone. In 2002, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against Exxon. As of 2002, OPA had prevented 18 ships from entering Prince William Sound.\nOPA also set a schedule for the gradual phase in of a double hull design, providing an additional layer between the oil tanks and the ocean. While a double hull would likely not have prevented the \"Valdez\" disaster, a Coast Guard study estimated that it would have cut the amount of oil spilled by 60 percent.\nThe \"Exxon Valdez\" supertanker was towed to San Diego, arriving on July 10. Repairs began on July 30. Approximately of steel were removed and replaced. In June 1990 the tanker, renamed \"Exxon Mediterranean\", left harbor after $30\u00a0million of repairs. In 1993, owned by SeaRiver Maritime, it was named \"S/R Mediterranean\", then in 2005 \"Mediterranean\". In 2008 the vessel was acquired by a Hong Kong company that operated it as \"Dong Fang Ocean\", then in 2011 renamed it \"Oriental Nicety\". In August 2012, it was beached at Alang, India, and dismantled.\nAlaska regulations.\nIn the aftermath of the spill, Alaska governor Steve Cowper issued an executive order requiring two tugboats to escort every loaded tanker from Valdez out through Prince William Sound to Hinchinbrook Entrance. As the plan evolved in the 1990s, one of the two routine tugboats was replaced with a Escort Response Vehicle (ERV). Tankers at Valdez are no longer single-hulled. Congress enacted legislation requiring all tankers to be double-hulled as of 2015.\nEconomic and personal impact.\nIn 1991, following the collapse of the local marine population (particularly clams, herring and seals) the Chugach Alaska Corporation, an Alaska Native Corporation, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. It has since recovered.\nAccording to several studies funded by the state of Alaska, the spill had both short-term and long-term economic effects. These included the loss of recreational sports, fisheries, reduced tourism, and an estimate of what economists call \"existence value\", which is the value to the public of a pristine Prince William Sound.\nThe economy of the city of Cordova, Alaska was adversely affected after the spill damaged stocks of salmon and herring in the area. The village of Chenega was transformed into an emergency base and media outlet. The local villagers had to cope with a tripling of their population from 80 to 250. When asked how they felt about the situation, a village councillor noted that they were too shocked and busy to be depressed; others emphasized the human costs of leaving children unattended while their parents worked to clean up. Many Native Americans were worried that too much time was spent on the fishery and not enough on the land that supports subsistence hunting.\nIn 2010, a CNN report alleged that many oil spill cleanup workers involved in the \"Exxon Valdez\" response had subsequently become sick. Anchorage lawyer Dennis Mestas found that this was true for 6,722 of 11,000 worker files he was able to inspect. Access to the records was controlled by Exxon. Exxon responded in a statement to CNN:\nAfter 20 years, there is no evidence suggesting that either cleanup workers or the residents of the communities affected by the Valdez spill have had any adverse health effects as a result of the spill or its cleanup.\nReactions.\nIn 1992, Exxon released a video titled \"Scientists and the Alaska Oil Spill\" for distribution to schools. Critics said the video misrepresented the clean-up process.\nIn December 1994, the Unabomber assassinated Burson-Marsteller executive Thomas Mosser, accusing him of having \"helped Exxon clean up its public image after the \"Exxon Valdez\" incident\".\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral weeks after the spill, \"Saturday Night Live\" aired a pointed sketch featuring Kevin Nealon, Phil Hartman, and Victoria Jackson as cleanup workers struggling to scrub the oil off of animals and rocks on a beach in Prince William Sound.\nIn the 1995 film \"Waterworld\", the \"Exxon Valdez\" is the flagship of the movie's villain, \"The Deacon,\" the leader of a band of scavenging raiders. In the ship is a portrait of their patron saint, Joseph Hazelwood.\nIn the second Forrest Gump novel, \"Gump and Co.\" by Winston Groom, Gump commandeers the \"Exxon Valdez\" and accidentally crashes it.\nComposer Jonathan Larson wrote a song called \"Iron Mike\" about the oil spill. The song is written in the style of a sea shanty. It was first professionally recorded by George Salazar for the album \"The Jonathan Larson Project\".\nThe 1992 made-for-television film \"\", produced by HBO, dramatized the oil spill disaster."}
{"id": "10244", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10244", "title": "\u00c9douard de Pomiane", "text": "\u00c9douard Alexandre de Pomiane, sometimes \u00c9douard Pozerski (20 April 1875 in Paris \u2013 26 January 1964 in Paris) was a French scientist, radio broadcaster and food writer.\nHis parents emigrated from Poland in 1863 after the January Uprising, changed their name from \"Pozerski\" to \"de Pomiane\", and became French citizens.\nDe Pomiane worked as a physician at the Institut Pasteur in Paris, where he gave F\u00e9lix d'Herelle a place to work on bacteriophages.\nHis best known works that have been translated into English are \"Cooking in Ten Minutes\" and \"Cooking with Pomiane\". His writing was remarkable in its time for its directness (he frequently uses a strange second-person voice, telling you\u2014the reader\u2014what you are seeing and smelling as you follow a recipe) and for his general disdain for upper-class elaborate French cuisine. He travelled widely and quite a few of his recipes are from abroad. His recipes often take pains to demystify cooking by explaining the chemical processes at work.\nBooks.\n\"Vingt Plats Qui Donnent Goutte\"IMG_7221.jpeg 1935 edition."}
{"id": "10245", "revid": "38242665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10245", "title": "Edward VI of England", "text": "Edward VI (12 October 1537 \u2013 6 July 1553) was the King of England and Ireland from 28 January 1547 until his death in 1553. He was crowned on 20 February at the age of nine. Edward was the son of Henry VIII and Jane Seymour, and England's first monarch to be raised as a Protestant. During his reign, the realm was governed by a regency council because he never reached maturity. The council was first led by his uncle Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset (1547\u20131549), and then by John Dudley, 1st Earl of Warwick (1550\u20131553), who from 1551 was Duke of Northumberland.\nEdward's reign was marked by economic problems and social unrest that in 1549 erupted into riot and rebellion. An expensive war with Scotland, at first successful, ended with military withdrawal from Scotland and Boulogne-sur-Mer in exchange for peace. The transformation of the Church of England into a recognisably Protestant body also occurred under Edward, who took great interest in religious matters. Although his father, HenryVIII, had severed the link between the Church and Rome, HenryVIII had never permitted the renunciation of Catholic doctrine or ceremony. It was during Edward's reign that Protestantism was established for the first time in England with reforms that included the abolition of clerical celibacy and the Mass, and the imposition of compulsory services in English.\nIn February 1553, at age 15, Edward fell ill. When his sickness was discovered to be terminal, he and his Council drew up a \"Devise for the Succession\", to prevent the country's return to Catholicism. Edward named his first cousin once removed, Lady Jane Grey, as his heir, excluding his half-sisters, Mary and Elizabeth. This decision was disputed following Edward's death, and Jane was deposed by Mary nine days after becoming queen. During her reign, Mary reversed Edward's Protestant reforms, which nonetheless became the basis of the Elizabethan Religious Settlement of 1559.\nEarly life.\nBirth.\nEdward was born on 12 October 1537 in his mother's room inside Hampton Court Palace, in Middlesex. He was the son of King Henry VIII by his third wife, Jane Seymour. Throughout the realm, the people greeted the birth of a male heir, \"whom we hungered for so long\", with joy and relief. \"Te Deums\" were sung in churches, bonfires lit, and \"their was shott at the Tower that night above two thousand gonnes\". Queen Jane, appearing to recover quickly from the birth, sent out personally signed letters announcing the birth of \"a Prince, conceived in most lawful matrimony between my Lord the King's Majesty and us\". Edward was christened on 15 October, with his half-sisters, the 21-year-old Lady Mary as godmother and the 4-year-old Lady Elizabeth carrying the chrisom; and the Garter King of Arms proclaimed him as Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester. The Queen, however, fell ill on 23 October from presumed postnatal complications, and died the following night. Henry VIII wrote to Francis I of France that \"Divine Providence\u00a0... hath mingled my joy with bitterness of the death of her who brought me this happiness\".\nUpbringing and education.\nEdward was a healthy baby who suckled strongly from the outset. His father was delighted with him; in May 1538, Henry was observed \"dallying with him in his arms\u00a0... and so holding him in a window to the sight and great comfort of the people\". That September, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Audley, reported Edward's rapid growth and vigour; and other accounts describe him as a tall and merry child. The tradition that Edward VI was a sickly boy has been challenged by more recent historians. At the age of four, he fell ill with a life-threatening \"quartan fever\", but, despite occasional illnesses and poor eyesight, he enjoyed generally good health until the last six months of his life.\nEdward was initially placed in the care of Margaret Bryan, \"lady mistress\" of the prince's household. She was succeeded by Blanche Herbert, Lady Troy. Until the age of six, Edward was brought up, as he put it later in his \"Chronicle\", \"among the women\". The formal royal household established around Edward was, at first, under Sir William Sidney, and later Sir Richard Page, stepfather of Edward Seymour's wife, Anne Stanhope. Henry demanded exacting standards of security and cleanliness in his son's household, stressing that Edward was \"this whole realm's most precious jewel\". Visitors described the prince, who was lavishly provided with toys and comforts, including his own troupe of minstrels, as a contented child.\nFrom the age of six, Edward began his formal education under Richard Cox and John Cheke, concentrating, as he recalled himself, on \"learning of tongues, of the scripture, of philosophy, and all liberal sciences\". He received tuition from Elizabeth's tutor, Roger Ascham, and Jean Belmain, learning French, Spanish and Italian. In addition, he is known to have studied geometry and learned to play musical instruments, including the lute and the virginals. He collected globes and maps and, according to coinage historian C. E. Challis, developed a grasp of monetary affairs that indicated a high intelligence. Edward's religious education is assumed to have favoured the reforming agenda. His religious establishment was probably chosen by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, a leading reformer. Both Cox and Cheke were \"reformed\" Catholics or Erasmians and later became Marian exiles. By 1549, Edward had written a treatise on the pope as Antichrist and was making informed notes on theological controversies. Many aspects of Edward's religion were essentially Catholic in his early years, including celebration of the mass and reverence for images and relics of the saints.\nBoth Edward's sisters were attentive to their brother and often visited him \u2013 on one occasion, Elizabeth gave him a shirt \"of her own working\". Edward \"took special content\" in Mary's company, though he disapproved of her taste for foreign dances; \"I love you most\", he wrote to her in 1546. In 1543, Henry invited his children to spend Christmas with him, signalling his reconciliation with his daughters, whom he had previously illegitimised and disinherited. The following spring, he restored them to their place in the succession with a Third Succession Act, which also provided for a regency council during Edward's minority. This unaccustomed family harmony may have owed much to the influence of Henry's new wife, Catherine Parr, of whom Edward soon became fond. He called her his \"most dear mother\" and in September 1546 wrote to her: \"I received so many benefits from you that my mind can hardly grasp them.\"\nOther children were brought to play with Edward, including the granddaughter of Edward's chamberlain, Sir William Sidney, who in adulthood recalled the prince as \"a marvellous sweet child, of very mild and generous condition\". Edward was educated with sons of nobles, \"appointed to attend upon him\" in what was a form of miniature court. Among these, Barnaby Fitzpatrick, son of an Irish peer, became a close and lasting friend. Edward was more devoted to his schoolwork than his classmates and seems to have outshone them, motivated to do his \"duty\" and compete with his sister Elizabeth's academic prowess. Edward's surroundings and possessions were regally splendid: his rooms were hung with costly Flemish tapestries, and his clothes, books, and cutlery were encrusted with precious jewels and gold. Like his father, Edward was fascinated by military arts, and many of his portraits show him wearing a gold dagger with a jewelled hilt, in imitation of Henry. Edward's \"Chronicle\" enthusiastically details English military campaigns against Scotland and France, and adventures such as John Dudley's near capture at Musselburgh in 1547.\n\"The Rough Wooing\".\nOn 1 July 1543, Henry VIII signed the Treaty of Greenwich with the Scots, sealing the peace with Edward's betrothal to the seven-month-old Mary, Queen of Scots. The Scots were in a weak bargaining position after their defeat at Solway Moss the previous November, and Henry, seeking to unite the two realms, stipulated that Mary be handed over to him to be brought up in England. When the Scots repudiated the treaty in December 1543 and renewed their alliance with France, Henry was enraged. In April 1544, he ordered Edward's uncle, Edward Seymour, Earl of Hertford, to invade Scotland and \"put all to fire and sword, burn Edinburgh town, so razed and defaced when you have sacked and gotten what ye can of it, as there may remain forever a perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon [them] for their falsehood and disloyalty\". Seymour responded with the most savage campaign ever launched by the English against the Scots. The war, which continued into Edward's reign, has become known as \"The Rough Wooing\".\nAccession.\nThe nine-year-old Edward wrote to his father and stepmother on 10 January 1547 from Hertford thanking them for his new year's gift of their portraits from life. By 28 January 1547, Henry VIII was dead. Those close to the throne, led by Edward Seymour and William Paget, agreed to delay the announcement of the king's death until arrangements had been made for a smooth succession. Seymour and Sir Anthony Browne, the Master of the Horse, rode to collect Edward from Hertford and brought him to Enfield, where Lady Elizabeth was living. He and Elizabeth were then told of the death of their father and heard a reading of the will.\nThe Lord Chancellor, Thomas Wriothesley, announced Henry's death to parliament on 31 January, and general proclamations of Edward's succession were ordered. The new king was taken to the Tower of London, where he was welcomed with \"great shot of ordnance in all places there about, as well out of the Tower as out of the ships\". The following day, the nobles of the realm made their obeisance to Edward at the Tower, and Seymour was announced as Protector. Henry VIII was buried at Windsor on 16 February, in the same tomb as Jane Seymour, as he had wished.\nEdward VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey four days later on Sunday 20 February. The ceremonies were shortened, because of the \"tedious length of the same which should weary and be hurtsome peradventure to the King's majesty, being yet of tender age\", and also because the Reformation had rendered some of them inappropriate.\nOn the eve of the coronation, Edward progressed on horseback from the Tower to the Palace of Westminster through thronging crowds and pageants, many based on the pageants for a previous boy king, Henry VI. He laughed at a Spanish tightrope walker who \"tumbled and played many pretty toys\" outside St Paul's Cathedral.\nAt the coronation service, Cranmer affirmed the royal supremacy and called Edward a second Josiah, urging him to continue the reformation of the Church of England, \"the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome banished from your subjects, and images removed\". After the service, Edward presided at a banquet in Westminster Hall, where, he recalled in his \"Chronicle\", he dined with his crown on his head.\nSomerset Protectorate.\nCouncil of Regency.\nHenry VIII's will named sixteen executors, who were to act as Edward's Council until he reached the age of eighteen. These executors were supplemented by twelve men \"of counsail\" who would assist the executors when called on. The final state of Henry VIII's will has been the subject of controversy. Some historians suggest that those close to the king manipulated either him or the will itself to ensure a share-out of power to their benefit, both material and religious. In this reading, the composition of the Privy Chamber shifted towards the end of 1546 in favour of the reforming faction. In addition, two leading conservative Privy Councillors were removed from the centre of power.\nStephen Gardiner was refused access to Henry during his last months. Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, found himself accused of treason; the day before the king's death his vast estates were seized, making them available for redistribution, and he spent the whole of Edward's reign in the Tower of London. Other historians have argued that Gardiner's exclusion was based on non-religious matters, that Norfolk was not noticeably conservative in religion, that conservatives remained on the Council, and that the radicalism of such men as Sir Anthony Denny, who controlled the dry stamp that replicated the king's signature, is debatable.\nWhatever the case, Henry's death was followed by a lavish hand-out of lands and honours to the new power group. The will contained an \"unfulfilled gifts\" clause, added at the last minute, which allowed Henry's executors to freely distribute lands and honours to themselves and the court, particularly to Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford, the new king's uncle who became Lord Protector of the Realm, Governor of the King's Person, and Duke of Somerset.\nIn fact, Henry VIII's will did not provide for the appointment of a Protector. It entrusted the government of the realm during his son's minority to a Regency Council that would rule collectively, by majority decision, with \"like and equal charge\". Nevertheless, a few days after Henry's death, on 4 February, the executors chose to invest almost regal power in Edward Seymour, now Duke of Somerset. Thirteen out of the sixteen (the others being absent) agreed to his appointment as Protector, which they justified as their joint decision \"by virtue of the authority\" of Henry's will. Somerset may have done a deal with some of the executors, who almost all received hand-outs. He is known to have done so with William Paget, private secretary to Henry VIII, and to have secured the support of Sir Anthony Browne of the Privy Chamber.\nSomerset's appointment was in keeping with historical precedent, and his eligibility for the role was reinforced by his military successes in Scotland and France. In March 1547, he secured letters patent from King Edward granting him the almost monarchical right to appoint members to the Privy Council himself and to consult them only when he wished. In the words of historian Geoffrey Elton, \"from that moment his autocratic system was complete\". He proceeded to rule largely by proclamation, calling on the Privy Council to do little more than rubber-stamp his decisions.\nSomerset's takeover of power was smooth and efficient. The imperial ambassador, Fran\u00e7ois van der Delft, reported that he \"governs everything absolutely\", with Paget operating as his secretary, though he predicted trouble from John Dudley, Viscount Lisle, who had recently been raised to Earl of Warwick in the share-out of honours. In fact, in the early weeks of his Protectorate, Somerset was challenged only by the Chancellor, Thomas Wriothesley, whom the Earldom of Southampton had evidently failed to buy off, and by his own brother. Wriothesley, a religious conservative, objected to Somerset's assumption of monarchical power over the Council. He then found himself abruptly dismissed from the chancellorship on charges of selling off some of his offices to delegates.\nThomas Seymour.\nSomerset faced less manageable opposition from his younger brother Thomas Seymour, who has been described as a \"worm in the bud\". As King Edward's uncle, Thomas Seymour demanded the governorship of the king's person and a greater share of power. Somerset tried to buy his brother off with a barony, an appointment to the Lord Admiralship, and a seat on the Privy Council\u2014but Thomas was bent on scheming for power. He began smuggling pocket money to King Edward, telling him that Somerset held the purse strings too tight, making him a \"beggarly king\". He also urged him to throw off the Protector within two years and \"bear rule as other kings do\"; but Edward, schooled to defer to the Council, failed to co-operate. In the spring of 1547, using Edward's support to circumvent Somerset's opposition, Thomas Seymour secretly married Henry VIII's widow Catherine Parr, whose Protestant household included the 11-year-old Lady Jane Grey and the 13-year-old Lady Elizabeth.\nIn summer 1548, a pregnant Catherine Parr discovered Thomas Seymour embracing Lady Elizabeth. As a result, Elizabeth was removed from Catherine Parr's household and transferred to Sir Anthony Denny's. That September, Catherine Parr died shortly after childbirth, and Thomas Seymour promptly resumed his attentions to Elizabeth by letter, planning to marry her. Elizabeth was receptive, but, like Edward, unready to agree to anything unless permitted by the Council. In January 1549, the Council had Thomas Seymour arrested on various charges, including embezzlement at the Bristol mint. King Edward, whom Seymour was accused of planning to marry to Lady Jane Grey, himself testified about the pocket money. Lack of clear evidence for treason ruled out a trial, so Seymour was condemned instead by an Act of Attainder and beheaded on 20 March 1549.\nWar.\nSomerset's only undoubted skill was as a soldier, which he had proven on expeditions to Scotland and in the defence of Boulogne-sur-Mer in 1546. From the first, his main interest as Protector was the war against Scotland. After a crushing victory at the Battle of Pinkie in September 1547, he set up a network of garrisons in Scotland, stretching as far north as Dundee. His initial successes, however, were followed by a loss of direction, as his aim of uniting the realms through conquest became increasingly unrealistic. The Scots allied with France, who sent reinforcements for the defence of Edinburgh in 1548. The Queen of Scots was moved to France, where she was betrothed to the Dauphin. The cost of maintaining the Protector's massive armies and his permanent garrisons in Scotland also placed an unsustainable burden on the royal finances. A French attack on Boulogne in August 1549 at last forced Somerset to begin a withdrawal from Scotland.\nRebellion.\nDuring 1548, England was subject to social unrest. After April 1549, a series of armed revolts broke out, fuelled by various religious and agrarian grievances. The two most serious rebellions, which required major military intervention to put down, were in Devon and Cornwall and in Norfolk. The first, sometimes called the Prayer Book Rebellion, arose from the imposition of Protestantism, and the second, led by a tradesman called Robert Kett, mainly from the encroachment of landlords on common grazing ground. A complex aspect of the social unrest was that the protesters believed they were acting legitimately against enclosing landlords with the Protector's support, convinced that the landlords were the lawbreakers.\nThe same justification for outbreaks of unrest was voiced throughout the country, not only in Norfolk and the west. The origin of the popular view of Somerset as sympathetic to the rebel cause lies partly in his series of sometimes liberal, often contradictory, proclamations, and partly in the uncoordinated activities of the commissions he sent out in 1548 and 1549 to investigate grievances about loss of tillage, encroachment of large sheep flocks on common land, and similar issues. Somerset's commissions were led by an evangelical M.P. called John Hales, whose socially liberal rhetoric linked the issue of enclosure with Reformation theology and the notion of a godly commonwealth. Local groups often assumed that the findings of these commissions entitled them to act against offending landlords themselves. King Edward wrote in his \"Chronicle\" that the 1549 risings began \"because certain commissions were sent down to pluck down enclosures\".\nWhatever the popular view of Somerset, the disastrous events of 1549 were taken as evidence of a colossal failure of government, and the Council laid the responsibility at the Protector's door. In July 1549, Paget wrote to Somerset: \"Every man of the council have misliked your proceedings\u00a0... would to God, that, at the first stir you had followed the matter hotly, and caused justice to be ministered in solemn fashion to the terror of others\u00a0...\".\nFall of Somerset.\nThe sequence of events that led to Somerset's removal from power has often been called a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". By 1 October 1549, Somerset had been alerted that his rule faced a serious threat. He issued a proclamation calling for assistance, took possession of the king's person, and withdrew for safety to the fortified Windsor Castle, where Edward wrote, \"Me thinks I am in prison\". Meanwhile, a united Council published details of Somerset's government mismanagement. They made clear that the Protector's power came from them, not from Henry VIII's will. On 11 October, the Council had Somerset arrested and brought the king to Richmond. Edward summarised the charges against Somerset in his \"Chronicle\": \"ambition, vainglory, entering into rash wars in mine youth, negligent looking on Newhaven, enriching himself of my treasure, following his own opinion, and doing all by his own authority, etc.\" In February 1550, John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, emerged as the leader of the Council and, in effect, as Somerset's successor. Although Somerset was released from the Tower and restored to the Council, he was executed for felony in January 1552 after scheming to overthrow Dudley's regime. Edward noted his uncle's death in his \"Chronicle\": \"the duke of Somerset had his head cut off upon Tower Hill between eight and nine o'clock in the morning\".\nHistorians contrast the efficiency of Somerset's takeover of power, in which they detect the organising skills of allies such as Paget, the \"master of practices\", with the subsequent ineptitude of his rule. By autumn 1549, his costly wars had lost momentum, the crown faced financial ruin, and riots and rebellions had broken out around the country. Until recent decades, Somerset's reputation with historians was high, in view of his many proclamations that appeared to back the common people against a rapacious landowning class. More recently, however, he has often been portrayed as an arrogant and aloof ruler, lacking in political and administrative skills.\nNorthumberland's leadership.\nIn contrast, Somerset's successor John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, made Duke of Northumberland in 1551, was once regarded by historians merely as a grasping schemer who cynically elevated and enriched himself at the expense of the crown. Since the 1970s, the administrative and economic achievements of his regime have been recognised, and he has been credited with restoring the authority of the royal Council and returning the government to an even keel after the disasters of Somerset's protectorate.\nThe Earl of Warwick's rival for leadership of the new regime was Thomas Wriothesley, 1st Earl of Southampton, whose conservative supporters had allied with Dudley's followers to create a unanimous Council, which they, and observers such as the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V's ambassador, expected to reverse Somerset's policy of religious reform. Warwick, on the other hand, pinned his hopes on the king's strong Protestantism and, claiming that Edward was old enough to rule in person, moved himself and his people closer to the king, taking control of the Privy Chamber. Paget, accepting a barony, joined Warwick when he realised that a conservative policy would not bring the emperor onto the English side over Boulogne. Southampton prepared a case for executing Somerset, aiming to discredit Warwick through Somerset's statements that he had done all with Warwick's co-operation. As a counter-move, Warwick convinced parliament to free Somerset, which it did on 14 January 1550. Warwick then had Southampton and his followers purged from the Council after winning the support of Council members in return for titles, and was made Lord President of the Council and great master of the king's household. Although not called a Protector, he was now clearly the head of the government.\nAs Edward was growing up, he was able to understand more and more government business. However, his actual involvement in decisions has long been a matter of debate, and during the 20th century, historians have presented the whole gamut of possibilities, \"balanc[ing] an articulate puppet against a mature, precocious, and essentially adult king\", in the words of Stephen Alford. A special \"Counsel for the Estate\" was created when Edward was fourteen. Edward chose the members himself. In the weekly meetings with this Council, Edward was \"to hear the debating of things of most importance\". A major point of contact with the king was the Privy Chamber, and there Edward worked closely with William Cecil and William Petre, the Principal Secretaries. The king's greatest influence was in matters of religion, where the Council followed the strongly Protestant policy that Edward favoured.\nThe Duke of Northumberland's mode of operation was very different from Somerset's. Careful to make sure he always commanded a majority of councillors, he encouraged a working council and used it to legitimise his authority. Lacking Somerset's blood-relationship with the king, he added members to the Council from his own faction in order to control it. He also added members of his family to the royal household. He saw that to achieve personal dominance, he needed total procedural control of the Council. In the words of historian John Guy, \"Like Somerset, he became quasi-king; the difference was that he managed the bureaucracy on the pretence that Edward had assumed full sovereignty, whereas Somerset had asserted the right to near-sovereignty as Protector\".\nWarwick's war policies were more pragmatic than Somerset's, and they have earned him criticism for weakness. In 1550, he signed a peace treaty with France that agreed to withdrawal from Boulogne and recalled all English garrisons from Scotland. In 1551, Edward was betrothed to Elisabeth of Valois, King Henry II's daughter, and was made a Knight of Saint Michael. In practice, he realised that England could no longer support the cost of wars. At home, he took measures to police local unrest. To forestall future rebellions, he kept permanent representatives of the crown in the localities, including lords lieutenant, who commanded military forces and reported back to central government.\nWorking with William Paulet and Walter Mildmay, Warwick tackled the disastrous state of the kingdom's finances. However, his regime first succumbed to the temptations of a quick profit by further debasing the coinage. The economic disaster that resulted caused Warwick to hand the initiative to the expert Thomas Gresham. By 1552, confidence in the coinage was restored, prices fell, and trade at last improved. Though a full economic recovery was not achieved until Elizabeth's reign, its origins lay in the Duke of Northumberland's policies. The regime also cracked down on widespread embezzlement of government finances, and carried out a thorough review of revenue collection practices, which has been called \"one of the more remarkable achievements of Tudor administration\".\nReformation.\nIn the matter of religion, the regime of Northumberland followed the same policy as that of Somerset, supporting an increasingly vigorous programme of reform. Although Edward VI's practical influence on government was limited, his intense Protestantism made a reforming administration obligatory; his succession was managed by the reforming faction, who continued in power throughout his reign. The man Edward trusted most, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, introduced a series of religious reforms that revolutionised the English church from one that\u2014while rejecting papal supremacy\u2014remained essentially Catholic, to one that was institutionally Protestant. The confiscation of church property that had begun under Henry VIII resumed under Edward\u2014notably with the dissolution of the chantries\u2014to the great monetary advantage of the crown and the new owners of the seized property. Church reform was therefore as much a political as a religious policy under Edward VI. By the end of his reign, the church had been financially ruined, with much of the property of the bishops transferred into lay hands.\nThe religious convictions of both Somerset and Northumberland have proved elusive for historians, who are divided on the sincerity of their Protestantism. There is less doubt, however, about the religious fervour of King Edward, who was said to have read twelve chapters of scripture daily and enjoyed sermons, and was commemorated by John Foxe as a \"godly imp\". Edward was depicted during his life and afterwards as a new Josiah, the biblical king who destroyed the idols of Baal. He could be priggish in his anti-Catholicism and once asked Catherine Parr to persuade Lady Mary \"to attend no longer to foreign dances and merriments which do not become a most Christian princess\". Edward's biographer Jennifer Loach cautions, however, against accepting too readily the pious image of Edward handed down by the reformers, as in John Foxe's influential \"Acts and Monuments\", where a woodcut depicts the young king listening to a sermon by Hugh Latimer. In the early part of his life, Edward conformed to the prevailing Catholic practices, including attendance at mass: but he became convinced, under the influence of Cranmer and the reformers among his tutors and courtiers, that \"true\" religion should be imposed in England.\nThe English Reformation advanced under pressure from two directions: from the traditionalists on the one hand and the zealots on the other, who led incidents of iconoclasm (image-smashing) and complained that reform did not go far enough. Reformed doctrines were made official, such as justification by faith alone and communion for laity as well as clergy in both kinds, of bread and wine. The Ordinal of 1550 replaced the divine ordination of priests with a government-run appointment system, authorising ministers to preach the gospel and administer the sacraments rather than, as before, \"to offer sacrifice and celebrate mass both for the living and the dead\". Cranmer set himself the task of writing a uniform liturgy in English, detailing all weekly and daily services and religious festivals, to be made compulsory in the first Act of Uniformity of 1549. The \"Book of Common Prayer\" of 1549, intended as a compromise, was attacked by traditionalists for dispensing with many cherished rituals of the liturgy, such as the elevation of the bread and wine, while some reformers complained about the retention of too many \"popish\" elements, including vestiges of sacrificial rites at communion. The prayer book was also opposed by many senior Catholic clerics, including Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, and Edmund Bonner, Bishop of London, who were both imprisoned in the Tower and, along with others, deprived of their sees.\nAfter 1551, the Reformation advanced further, with the approval and encouragement of Edward, who began to exert more personal influence in his role as Supreme Head of the church. The new changes were also a response to criticism from such reformers as John Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, and the Scot John Knox, who was employed as a minister in Newcastle upon Tyne under the Duke of Northumberland and whose preaching at court prompted the king to oppose kneeling at communion. Cranmer was also influenced by the views of the continental reformer Martin Bucer, who died in England in 1551, by Peter Martyr, who was teaching at Oxford, and by other foreign theologians. The progress of the Reformation was further speeded by the consecration of more reformers as bishops. In the winter of 1551\u201352, Cranmer rewrote the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in less ambiguous reformist terms, revised canon law, and prepared a doctrinal statement, the Forty-two Articles, to clarify the practice of the reformed religion, particularly in the divisive matter of the communion service. Cranmer's formulation of the reformed religion, finally divesting the communion service of any notion of the real presence of God in the bread and the wine, effectively abolished the mass. According to Elton, the publication of Cranmer's revised prayer book in 1552, supported by a second Act of Uniformity, \"marked the arrival of the English Church at Protestantism\". The prayer book of 1552 remains the foundation of the Church of England's services. However, Cranmer was unable to implement all these reforms once it became clear in spring 1553 that King Edward, upon whom the whole Reformation in England depended, was dying.\nSuccession crisis.\nDevise for the succession.\nIn February 1553, Edward VI became ill, and by June, after several improvements and relapses, he was in a hopeless condition. The king's death and the succession of his Catholic half-sister Mary would jeopardise the English Reformation, and Edward's Council and officers had many reasons to fear it. Edward himself opposed Mary's succession, not only on religious grounds but also on those of legitimacy and male inheritance, which also applied to Elizabeth. He composed a draft document, headed \"My devise for the succession\", in which he undertook to change the succession, most probably inspired by his father Henry VIII's precedent. He passed over the claims of his half-sisters and, at last, settled the Crown on his first cousin once removed, the 16-year-old Lady Jane Grey, who on 25 May 1553 had married Lord Guilford Dudley, a younger son of the Duke of Northumberland. In the document he writes:\nIn his document Edward provided, in case of \"lack of issue of my body\", for the succession of male heirs only, that is, Jane Grey's mother's male heirs, Jane's, or her sisters'. As his death approached and possibly persuaded by Northumberland, he altered the wording so that Jane and her sisters themselves should be able to succeed. Yet Edward conceded Jane's right only as an exception to male rule, demanded by reality, an example not to be followed if Jane or her sisters had only daughters. In the final document both Mary and Elizabeth were excluded because of bastardy; since both had been declared bastards under Henry VIII and never made legitimate again, this reason could be advanced for both sisters. The provisions to alter the succession directly contravened Henry VIII's Third Succession Act of 1543 and have been described as bizarre and illogical.\nIn early June, Edward personally supervised the drafting of a clean version of his devise by lawyers, to which he lent his signature \"in six several places.\" Then, on 15 June he summoned high ranking judges to his sickbed, commanding them on their allegiance \"with sharp words and angry countenance\" to prepare his devise as letters patent and announced that he would have these passed in parliament. His next measure was to have leading councillors and lawyers sign a bond in his presence, in which they agreed faithfully to perform Edward's will after his death. A few months later, Chief Justice Edward Montagu recalled that when he and his colleagues had raised legal objections to the devise, Northumberland had threatened them \"trembling for anger, and ... further said that he would fight in his shirt with any man in that quarrel\". Montagu also overheard a group of lords standing behind him conclude \"if they refused to do that, they were traitors\". At last, on 21 June, the devise was signed by over a hundred notables, including councillors, peers, archbishops, bishops, and sheriffs; many of them later claimed that they had been bullied into doing so by Northumberland, although in the words of Edward's biographer Jennifer Loach, \"few of them gave any clear indication of reluctance at the time\".\nIt was now common knowledge that Edward was dying, and foreign diplomats suspected that some scheme to debar Mary was under way. France found the prospect of the emperor's cousin on the English throne disagreeable and engaged in secret talks with Northumberland, indicating support. The diplomats were certain that the overwhelming majority of the English people backed Mary, but nevertheless believed that Queen Jane would be successfully established.\nFor centuries, the attempt to alter the succession was mostly seen as a one-man-plot by the Duke of Northumberland. Since the 1970s, however, many historians have attributed the inception of the \"devise\" and the insistence on its implementation to the king's initiative. Diarmaid MacCulloch has made out Edward's \"teenage dreams of founding an evangelical realm of Christ\", while David Starkey has stated that \"Edward had a couple of co-operators, but the driving will was his\". Among other members of the Privy Chamber, Northumberland's intimate Sir John Gates has been suspected of suggesting to Edward to change his devise so that Lady Jane Grey herself\u2014not just any sons of hers\u2014could inherit the Crown. Whatever the degree of his contribution, Edward was convinced that his word was law and fully endorsed disinheriting his half-sisters: \"barring Mary from the succession was a cause in which the young King believed.\"\nIllness and death.\nEdward became ill during January 1553 with a fever and cough that gradually worsened. The imperial ambassador, Jean Scheyfve, reported that \"he suffers a good deal when the fever is upon him, especially from a difficulty in drawing his breath, which is due to the compression of the organs on the right side\". Edward felt well enough in early April to take the air in the park at Westminster and to move to Greenwich, but by the end of the month he had weakened again. By 7 May he was \"much amended\", and the royal doctors had no doubt of his recovery. A few days later the king was watching the ships on the Thames, sitting at his window. However, he relapsed, and on 11 June Scheyfve, who had an informant in the king's household, reported that \"the matter he ejects from his mouth is sometimes coloured a greenish yellow and black, sometimes pink, like the colour of blood\". Now his doctors believed he was suffering from \"a suppurating tumour\" of the lung and admitted that Edward's life was beyond recovery. Soon, his legs became so swollen that he had to lie on his back, and he lost the strength to resist the disease. To his tutor John Cheke he whispered, \"I am glad to die\".\nEdward made his final appearance in public on 1 July, when he showed himself at his window in Greenwich Palace, horrifying those who saw him by his \"thin and wasted\" condition. During the next two days, large crowds arrived hoping to see the king again, but on 3 July, they were told that the weather was too chilly for him to appear. Edward died at the age of 15 at Greenwich Palace at 8\u00a0pm on 6 July 1553. According to John Foxe's legendary account of his death, his last words were: \"I am faint; Lord have mercy upon me, and take my spirit\". He was buried in the Henry VII Lady Chapel at Westminster Abbey on 8 August 1553, with reformed rites performed by Thomas Cranmer. The procession was led by \"a grett company of chylderyn in ther surples\" and watched by Londoners \"wepyng and lamenting\"; the funeral chariot, draped in cloth of gold, was topped by an effigy of Edward, with crown, sceptre, and garter. Edward's burial place was unmarked until as late as 1966, when an inscribed stone was laid in the chapel floor by Christ's Hospital school to commemorate their founder. The inscription reads as follows: \"In Memory Of King Edward VI Buried In This Chapel This Stone Was Placed Here By Christ's Hospital In Thanksgiving For Their Founder 7 October 1966\".\nThe cause of Edward VI's death is not certain. As with many royal deaths in the 16th century, rumours of poisoning abounded, but no evidence has been found to support these. The Duke of Northumberland, whose unpopularity was underlined by the events that followed Edward's death, was widely believed to have ordered the imagined poisoning. Another theory held that Edward had been poisoned by Catholics seeking to bring Mary to the throne. The surgeon who opened Edward's chest after his death found that \"the disease whereof his majesty died was the disease of the lungs\". The Venetian ambassador reported that Edward had died of consumption\u2014in other words, tuberculosis\u2014a diagnosis accepted by many historians. Skidmore believes that Edward contracted tuberculosis after a bout of measles and smallpox in 1552 that suppressed his natural immunity to the disease. Loach suggests instead that his symptoms were typical of acute bronchopneumonia, leading to a \"suppurating pulmonary infection\" or lung abscess, septicaemia, and kidney failure.\nQueen Jane and Queen Mary.\nLady Mary was last seen by Edward in February, and was kept informed about the state of her half-brother's health by Northumberland and through her contacts with the imperial ambassadors. Aware of Edward's imminent death, she left Hunsdon House, near London, and sped to her estates around Kenninghall in Norfolk, where she could count on the support of her tenants. Northumberland sent ships to the Norfolk coast to prevent her escape or the arrival of reinforcements from the continent. He delayed the announcement of the king's death while he gathered his forces, and Jane Grey was taken to the Tower on 10 July. On the same day, she was proclaimed queen in the streets of London, to murmurings of discontent. The Privy Council received a message from Mary asserting her \"right and title\" to the throne and commanding that the Council proclaim her queen, as she had already proclaimed herself. The Council replied that Jane was queen by Edward's authority and that Mary, by contrast, was illegitimate and supported only by \"a few lewd, base people\".\nNorthumberland soon realised that he had miscalculated drastically, not least in failing to secure Mary's person before Edward's death. Although many of those who rallied to Mary were conservatives hoping for the defeat of Protestantism, her supporters also included many for whom her lawful claim to the throne overrode religious considerations. Northumberland was obliged to relinquish control of a nervous Council in London and launch an unplanned pursuit of Mary into East Anglia, from where news was arriving of her growing support, which included a number of nobles and gentlemen and \"innumerable companies of the common people\". On 14 July Northumberland marched out of London with three thousand men, reaching Cambridge the next day; meanwhile, Mary rallied her forces at Framlingham Castle in Suffolk, gathering an army of nearly twenty thousand by 19 July.\nIt now dawned on the Privy Council that it had made a terrible mistake. Led by the Earl of Arundel and the Earl of Pembroke, on 19 July the Council publicly proclaimed Mary as queen; Jane's nine-day reign came to an end. The proclamation triggered wild rejoicing throughout London. Stranded in Cambridge, Northumberland proclaimed Mary himself\u2014as he had been commanded to do by a letter from the Council. William Paget and the Earl of Arundel rode to Framlingham to beg Mary's pardon, and Arundel arrested Northumberland on 24 July. Northumberland was beheaded on 22 August, shortly after renouncing Protestantism. His recantation dismayed his daughter-in-law, Jane, who followed him to the scaffold on 12 February 1554, after her father's involvement in Wyatt's rebellion.\nProtestant legacy.\nAlthough Edward reigned for only six years and died at the age of 15, his reign made a lasting contribution to the English Reformation and the structure of the Church of England. The last decade of Henry VIII's reign had seen a partial stalling of the Reformation, a drifting back to more conservative values. By contrast, Edward's reign saw radical progress in the Reformation. In those six years, the Church transferred from an essentially Catholic liturgy and structure to one that is usually identified as Protestant. In particular, the introduction of the Book of Common Prayer, the Ordinal of 1550, and Cranmer's Forty-two Articles formed the basis for English Church practices that continue to this day. Edward himself fully approved these changes, and though they were the work of reformers such as Thomas Cranmer, Hugh Latimer, and Nicholas Ridley, backed by Edward's determinedly evangelical Council, the fact of the king's religion was a catalyst in the acceleration of the Reformation during his reign.\nQueen Mary's attempts to undo the reforming work of her brother's reign faced major obstacles. Despite her belief in the papal supremacy, she ruled constitutionally as the Supreme Head of the English Church, a contradiction under which she bridled. She found herself entirely unable to restore the vast number of ecclesiastical properties handed over or sold to private landowners. Although she burned a number of leading Protestant churchmen, many reformers either went into exile or remained subversively active in England during her reign, producing a torrent of reforming propaganda that she was unable to stem. Nevertheless, Protestantism was not yet \"printed in the stomachs\" of the English people, and had Mary lived longer, her Catholic reconstruction might have succeeded, leaving Edward's reign, rather than hers, as a historical aberration.\nOn Mary's death in 1558, the English Reformation resumed its course, and most of the reforms instituted during Edward's reign were reinstated in the Elizabethan Religious Settlement. Queen Elizabeth replaced Mary's councillors and bishops with ex-Edwardians, such as William Cecil, Northumberland's former secretary, and Richard Cox, Edward's old tutor, who preached an anti-Catholic sermon at the opening of parliament in 1559. Parliament passed an Act of Uniformity the following spring that restored, with modifications, Cranmer's prayer book of 1552; and the Thirty-nine Articles of 1563 were largely based on Cranmer's Forty-two Articles. The theological developments of Edward's reign provided a vital source of reference for Elizabeth's religious policies, though the internationalism of the Edwardian Reformation was never revived.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10248", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10248", "title": "Extrapyramidal", "text": "Extrapyramidal can refer to:"}
{"id": "10249", "revid": "104523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10249", "title": "Extrapyramidal side-effect", "text": ""}
{"id": "10251", "revid": "20664065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10251", "title": "EDSAC", "text": "The Electronic delay storage automatic calculator (EDSAC) was an early British computer. Inspired by John von Neumann's seminal \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\", the machine was constructed by Maurice Wilkes and his team at the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory in England. EDSAC was the second electronic digital stored-program computer to go into regular service.\nLater the project was supported by J. Lyons &amp; Co. Ltd., intending to develop a commercially applied computer and succeeding in Lyons' development of LEO I, based on the EDSAC design. Work on EDSAC started during 1947, and it ran its first programs on 6 May 1949, when it calculated a table of square numbers and a list of prime numbers. EDSAC was finally shut down on 11 July 1958, having been superseded by EDSAC 2, which remained in use until 1965.\nTechnical overview.\nPhysical components.\nAs soon as EDSAC was operational, it began serving the University's research needs. It used mercury delay lines for memory, and derated vacuum tubes for logic. Power consumption was 11 kW of electricity. Cycle time was 1.5 ms for all ordinary instructions, 6 ms for multiplication. Input was via five-hole punched tape and output was via a teleprinter.\nInitially registers were limited to an accumulator and a multiplier register. In 1953, David Wheeler, returning from a stay at the University of Illinois, designed an index register as an extension to the original EDSAC hardware.\nA magnetic tape drive was added in 1952 but never worked sufficiently well to be of real use.\nUntil 1952, the available main memory (instructions and data) was only 512 18-bit words, and there was no backing store. The delay lines (or \"tanks\") were arranged in two batteries providing 512 words each. The second battery came into operation in 1952.\nThe full 1024-word delay line store was not available until 1955 or early 1956, limiting programs to about 800 words until then.\nJohn Lindley (diploma student 1958\u20131959) mentioned \"the incredible difficulty we had ever to produce a single correct piece of paper tape with the crude and unreliable home-made punching, printing and verifying gear available in the late 50s\".\nMemory and instructions.\nThe EDSAC's main memory consisted of 1024 locations, though only 512 locations were initially installed. Each contained 18 bits, but the topmost bit was always unavailable due to timing problems, so only 17 bits were used. An instruction consisted of a five-bit instruction code, one spare bit, a ten bit operand (usually a memory address), and a length bit to control whether the instruction used a 17-bit or a 35-bit operand (two consecutive words, little-endian). All instruction codes were by design represented by one mnemonic letter, so that the \"Add\" instruction, for example, used the EDSAC character code for the letter A.\nInternally, the EDSAC used two's complement, binary numbers. Numbers were either 17 bits (one word) or 35 bits (two words) long. Unusually, the multiplier was designed to treat numbers as fixed-point fractions in the range \u22121 \u2264 \"x\" &lt; 1, i.e. the binary point was immediately to the right of the sign. The accumulator could hold 71 bits, including the sign, allowing two long (35-bit) numbers to be multiplied without losing any precision.\nThe instructions available were:\nThere was no division instruction (but various division subroutines were supplied) and no way to directly load a number into the accumulator (a \"sTore and zero accumulator\" instruction followed by an \"Add\" instruction were necessary for this). There was no unconditional jump instruction, nor was there a procedure call instruction\u00a0\u2013 it had not yet been invented.\nMaurice Wilkes discussed relative addressing modes for the EDSAC in a paper published in 1953. He was making the proposals to facilitate the use of subroutines.\nSystem software.\nThe \"initial orders\" were hard-wired on a set of uniselector switches and loaded into the low words of memory at startup. By May 1949, the initial orders provided a primitive relocating assembler taking advantage of the mnemonic design described above, all in 31 words. This was the world's first assembler, and arguably the start of the global software industry. There is a simulation of EDSAC available and a full description of the initial orders and first programs.\nThe first calculation done by EDSAC was a square number program run on 6 May 1949. The program was written by Beatrice Worsley who had come from Canada to study the machine.\nThe machine was used by other members of the University to solve real problems, and many early techniques were developed that are now included in operating systems.\nUsers prepared their programs by punching them (in assembler) onto a paper tape. They soon became good at being able to hold the paper tape up to the light and read back the codes. When a program was ready it was hung on a length of line strung up near the paper tape reader. The machine operators, who were present during the day, selected the next tape from the line and loaded it into EDSAC. This is of course well known today as job queues. If it printed something then the tape and the printout were returned to the user, otherwise they were informed at which memory location it had stopped. Debuggers were some time away, but a CRT screen could be set to display the contents of a particular piece of memory. This was used to see if a number was converging, for example. A loudspeaker was connected to the accumulator's sign bit; experienced users knew healthy and unhealthy sounds of programs, particularly programs 'hung' in a loop. After office hours certain \"Authorised Users\" were allowed to run the machine for themselves, which went on late into the night until a valve blew \u2013 which usually happened according to one such user.\nProgramming technique.\nThe early programmers had to make use of techniques frowned upon today\u2014especially altering the code. As there was no index register until much later, the only way of accessing an array was to alter which memory location a particular instruction was referencing.\nDavid Wheeler, who earned the world's first Computer Science PhD working on the project, is credited with inventing the concept of a subroutine. Users wrote programs that called a routine by jumping to the start of the subroutine with the return address (i.e. the location-plus-one of the jump itself) in the accumulator (a Wheeler Jump). By convention the subroutine expected this and the first thing it did was to modify its concluding jump instruction to that return address. Multiple and nested subroutines could be called so long as the user knew the length of each one in order to calculate the location to jump to; recursive calls were forbidden. The user then copied the code for the subroutine from a master tape onto their own tape following the end of their own program. (However, Turing discussed subroutines in a paper of 1945 on design proposals for the NPL ACE, going so far as to invent the concept of a return address stack, which would have allowed recursion.)\nApplication software.\nThe subroutine concept led to the availability of a substantial subroutine library. By 1951, 87 subroutines in the following categories were available for general use: floating point arithmetic; arithmetic operations on complex numbers; checking; division; exponentiation; routines relating to functions; differential equations; special functions; power series; logarithms; miscellaneous; print and layout; quadrature; read (input); \"n\"th root; trigonometric functions; counting operations (simulating repeat until loops, while loops and for loops); vectors; and matrices.\nApplications of EDSAC.\nEDSAC was designed specifically to form part of the Mathematical Laboratory's support service for calculation. The first scientific paper to be published using a computer for calculations was by Ronald Fisher. Wilkes and Wheeler had used EDSAC to solve a differential equation relating to gene frequencies for him. In 1951, Miller and Wheeler used the machine to discover a 79-digit prime \u2013 the largest known at the time.\nThe winners of three Nobel Prizes: John Kendrew and Max Perutz (Chemistry, 1962), Andrew Huxley (Medicine, 1963) and Martin Ryle (Physics, 1974) benefitted from EDSAC's revolutionary computing power. In their acceptance prize speeches, each acknowledged the role that EDSAC had played in their research.\nIn the early 1960s Peter Swinnerton-Dyer used the EDSAC computer to calculate the number of points modulo \"p\" (denoted by \"Np\") for a large number of primes \"p\" on elliptic curves whose rank was known. Based on these numerical results conjectured that \"Np\" for a curve \"E\" with rank \"r\" obeys an asymptotic law, the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, considered one of the top unsolved problems in mathematics as of 2016.\nGames.\nIn 1952, Sandy Douglas developed \"OXO\", a version of noughts and crosses (tic-tac-toe) for the EDSAC, with graphical output to a VCR97 6\" cathode ray tube. This may well have been the world's first video game.\nAnother video game was created by Stanley Gill and involved a dot (termed a sheep) approaching a line in which one of two gates could be opened. The Stanley Gill game was controlled via the lightbeam of the EDSAC's paper tape reader. Interrupting it (such as by the player placing their hand in it) would open the upper gate. Leaving the beam unbroken would result in the lower gate opening.\nFurther developments.\nEDSAC's successor, EDSAC 2, was commissioned in 1958.\nIn 1961, an EDSAC 2 version of Autocode, an ALGOL-like high-level programming language for scientists and engineers, was developed by David Hartley.\nIn the mid-1960s, a successor to the EDSAC 2 was planned, but the move was instead made to the Titan, a prototype Atlas 2 developed from the Atlas Computer of the University of Manchester, Ferranti, and Plessey.\nEDSAC Replica Project.\nOn 13 January 2011, the Computer Conservation Society announced that it planned to build a working replica of EDSAC, at the National Museum of Computing (TNMoC) in Bletchley Park supervised by Andrew Herbert, who studied under Maurice Wilkes. The first parts of the recreation were switched on in November 2014. The ongoing project is open to visitors of the museum. In 2016, two original EDSAC operators, Margaret Marrs and Joyce Wheeler, visited the museum to assist the project. As of November 2016, commissioning of the fully completed and operational state of the replica was estimated to be the autumn of 2017. However, project delays have postponed its opening."}
{"id": "10252", "revid": "38890092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10252", "title": "E. H. Shepard", "text": "Ernest Howard Shepard (10 December 1879 \u2013 24 March 1976) was an English artist and book illustrator. He is known especially for illustrations of the anthropomorphic animal and soft toy characters in \"The Wind in the Willows\" and \"Winnie-the-Pooh\".\nCareer.\nShepard was born in St John's Wood, London. Having shown some promise in drawing at St Paul's School, in 1897 he enrolled in the Heatherley School of Fine Art in Chelsea. After a productive year there, he attended the Royal Academy Schools, winning a Landseer scholarship in 1899 and a British Institute prize in 1900. There he met Florence Eleanor Chaplin, whom he married in 1904. By 1906 Shepard had become a successful illustrator, having produced work for illustrated editions of Aesop's Fables, \"David Copperfield\", and \"Tom Brown's Schooldays\", while at the same time working as an illustrator on the staff of \"Punch\". The couple bought a house in London, but in 1905 moved to Shamley Green, near Guildford.\nShepard was a prolific painter, showing in a number of exhibitions. He exhibited at the Royal Society of Artists, Birmingham\u2014a traditional venue for generic painters\u2014as well as in the more radical atmosphere of Glasgow's Institute of Fine Arts, where some of the most innovative artists were on show. He was twice an exhibitor at the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, one of the largest provincial galleries in the country, and another at the Manchester Art Gallery, a Victorian institution later part of the public libraries. But at heart, Shepard was a Londoner, showing sixteen times at the Royal Academy on Piccadilly. His wife, who was also a painter, found a home in London's West End venue for her own modest output during a 25-year career.\nIn his mid-thirties when World War I broke out in 1914, Shepard received a commission as a second lieutenant in the Royal Garrison Artillery, an arm of the Royal Artillery. He was assigned to 105th Siege Battery, which crossed to France in May 1916. and went into action at the Battle of the Somme.\nBy the autumn of 1916, Shepard started working for the Intelligence Department sketching the combat area within the view of his battery position. On 16 February 1917, he was made an acting captain whilst second-in-command of his battery, and briefly served as an acting major in late April and early May of that year during the Battle of Arras before reverting to acting captain. He was promoted to substantive lieutenant on 1 July 1917. Whilst acting as Captain, he was awarded the Military Cross. His citation read:\nLater in 1917 105th Siege Battery participated in the final stages of the Battle of Passchendaele where it came under heavy fire and suffered a number of casualties. At the end of the year it was sent to help retrieve a disastrous situation on the Italian Front, travelling by rail via Verona before coming into action on the Montello Hill.\nShepard missed the Second Battle of the Piave River in April 1918, being on leave in England (where he was invested with his MC by King George V at Buckingham Palace) and where he was attending a gunnery course. He was back in Italy with his battery for the victory at Vittorio Veneto. After the Armistice of Villa Giusti in November 1918, Shepard was promoted to acting major in command of the battery, and given the duty of administering captured enemy guns. Demobilisation began at Christmas 1918 and 105th Siege Battery was disbanded in March 1919.\nThroughout the war he had been contributing to \"Punch\". He was hired as a regular staff cartoonist in 1921 and became lead cartoonist in 1945. He was removed from this post in 1953 by \"Punch\"'s new editor, Malcolm Muggeridge. His work was also part of the painting event in the art competition at the 1928 Summer Olympics.\nShepard was recommended to A. A. Milne in 1923 by another \"Punch\" staffer, E. V. Lucas. Milne initially thought Shepard's style was not what he wanted, but used him to illustrate the book of poems \"When We Were Very Young\". Happy with the results, Milne then insisted Shepard illustrate \"Winnie-the-Pooh\". Realising his illustrator's contribution to the book's success, the writer arranged for Shepard to receive a share of his royalties. Milne also inscribed a copy of \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" with the following personal verse:\nEventually Shepard came to resent \"that silly old bear\" as he felt that the Pooh illustrations overshadowed his other work.\nShepard modelled Pooh not on the toy owned by Milne's son Christopher Robin but on \"Growler\", a stuffed bear owned by his own son. (Growler no longer exists, having been given to his granddaughter Minnie Hunt and subsequently destroyed by a neighbour's dog.) His Pooh work is so famous that 300 of his preliminary sketches were exhibited at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1969, when he was 90 years old.\nA Shepard painting of Winnie the Pooh, believed to have been painted in the 1930s for a Bristol teashop, is his only known oil painting of the famous teddy bear. It was purchased at an auction for $243,000 in London late in 2000. The painting is displayed in the Pavilion Gallery at Assiniboine Park in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, the city after which Winnie is named.\nShepard wrote two autobiographies: \"Drawn from Memory\" (1957) and \"Drawn From Life\" (1961).\nIn 1972, Shepard gave his personal collection of papers and illustrations to the University of Surrey. These now form the E.H. Shepard Archive.\nShepard was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1972 Birthday Honours.\nPersonal life.\nShepard lived at Melina Place in St John's Wood and from 1955 in Lodsworth, West Sussex. He and Florence had two children, Graham (born 1906) and Mary (born 1906\n), who both became illustrators. Lt. Graham Shepard died when his ship HMS \"Polyanthus\" was sunk by German submarine U-952 in September 1943. Mary married E.V. Knox, the editor of \"Punch\", and became known as the illustrator of the \"Mary Poppins\" series of children's books. Florence Shepard died in 1927. In November 1943 Shepard married Norah Carroll, a nurse at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. They remained married until his death in 1976. In 1966, he called the short film Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree a travesty."}
{"id": "10253", "revid": "40600116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10253", "title": "Enterobacteriaceae", "text": "Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of Gram-negative bacteria. It was first proposed by Rahn in 1936, and now includes over 30 genera and more than 100 species. Its classification above the level of family is still a subject of debate, but one classification places it in the order Enterobacterales of the class Gammaproteobacteria in the phylum Proteobacteria.\nEnterobacteriaceae includes, along with many harmless symbionts, many of the more familiar pathogens, such as \"Salmonella\", \"Escherichia coli\", \"Klebsiella\", and \"Shigella\". Other disease-causing bacteria in this family include \"Enterobacter\" and \"Citrobacter\". Members of the Enterobacteriaceae can be trivially referred to as enterobacteria or \"enteric bacteria\", as several members live in the intestines of animals. In fact, the etymology of the family is enterobacterium with the suffix to designate a family (aceae)\u2014not after the genus \"Enterobacter\" (which would be \"Enterobacteraceae\")\u2014and the type genus is \"Escherichia\".\nMorphology.\nMembers of the Enterobacteriaceae are bacilli (rod-shaped), and are typically 1\u20135 \u03bcm in length. They typically appear as medium to large-sized grey colonies on blood agar, although some can express pigments.\nMost have many flagella used to move about, but a few genera are nonmotile. Most members of Enterobacteriaceae have peritrichous, type I fimbriae involved in the adhesion of the bacterial cells to their hosts.\nThey are not spore-forming.\nMetabolism.\nLike other proteobacteria, enterobactericeae have Gram-negative stains, and they are facultative anaerobes, fermenting sugars to produce lactic acid and various other end products. Most also reduce nitrate to nitrite, although exceptions exist. Unlike most similar bacteria, enterobacteriaceae generally lack cytochrome c oxidase, there are exceptions.\nCatalase reactions vary among Enterobacteriaceae.\nEcology.\nMany members of this family are normal members of the gut microbiota in humans and other animals, while others are found in water or soil, or are parasites on a variety of different animals and plants.\nModel organisms and medical relevance.\n\"Escherichia coli\" is one of the most important model organisms, and its genetics and biochemistry have been closely studied.\nSome enterobacteria are important pathogens, e.g. \"Salmonella\", or \"Shigella\" e.g. because they produce endotoxins. Endotoxins reside in the cell wall and are released when the cell dies and the cell wall disintegrates. Some members of the \"Enterobacteriaceae\" produce endotoxins that, when released into the bloodstream following cell lysis, cause a systemic inflammatory and vasodilatory response. The most severe form of this is known as endotoxic shock, which can be rapidly fatal.\nGenera.\nValidly published genera.\nThe following genera have been validly published, thus they have \"Standing in Nomenclature\". The year the genus was proposed is listed in parentheses after the genus name.\nProposed genera.\nThe following genera have been effectively, but not validly, published, thus they do not have \"Standing in Nomenclature\". The year the genus was proposed is listed in parentheses after the genus name.\nIdentification.\nTo identify different genera of Enterobacteriaceae, a microbiologist may run a series of tests in the lab. These include:\nIn a clinical setting, three species make up 80 to 95% of all isolates identified. These are \"Escherichia coli\", \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", and \"Proteus mirabilis\". However, \"Proteus mirabilis\" is now considered a part of the Morganellaceae, a sister clade within the Enterobacterales.\nAntibiotic resistance.\nSeveral Enterobacteriaceae strains have been isolated which are resistant to antibiotics including carbapenems, which are often claimed as \"the last line of antibiotic defense\" against resistant organisms. For instance, some \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" strains are carbapenem resistant."}
{"id": "10256", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10256", "title": "Eccentricity", "text": "Eccentricity or eccentric may refer to:"}
{"id": "10257", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10257", "title": "Essendon Football Club", "text": "The Essendon Football Club, nicknamed the Bombers, is a professional Australian rules football club based in the northern Melbourne suburb of Melbourne Airport that plays in the Australian Football League (AFL), the sport's premier competition. Founded in 1872 in the nearby suburb of Essendon, the club participated in the Victorian Football Association from 1878 until 1896, when it joined seven other clubs in forming the breakaway Victorian Football League (now the AFL). Headquartered at Windy Hill for much of the 20th century, the club moved to The Hangar in Melbourne Airport in 2013, and currently plays its home games at either Docklands Stadium or the Melbourne Cricket Ground. Dyson Heppell is the current club captain.\nEssendon is one of Australia's best-known football clubs. It has won 16 VFL/AFL premierships, which, along with Carlton, is the most of any club in the competition. The club won four consecutive VFA premierships between 1891 and 1894, a feat unmatched in that competition's history. Essendon also hold the distinction of being the only club to win a premiership in their inaugural season (1897). Three Essendon players are \"Legends\" in the Australian Football Hall of Fame: John Coleman, Bill Hutchison and Dick Reynolds.\nEssendon fields reserves men's and women's teams in the Victoria Football League and VFL Women's, however as of 2021 it is one of four AFL clubs not to have a team competing in the national AFL Women's competition.\nHistory.\nFormation and VFA years (1871\u20131896).\nThe club was founded by members of the Royal Agricultural Society, the Melbourne Hunt Club and the Victorian Woolbrokers. The Essendon Football Club is thought to have formed in 1872 at a meeting it the home of a well-known brewery family, the McCrackens, whose Ascot Vale property hosted a team of local junior players.\nRobert McCracken (1813\u20131885), the owner of several city hotels, was the founder and first president of the Essendon Football club and his son, Alex McCracken, its first secretary. Alex later became president of the newly formed VFL. Alex's cousin, Collier McCracken, who had already played with Melbourne, was the team's first captain.\nThe club played its first recorded match against the Carlton second twenty on 7 June 1873, with Essendon winning by one goal. Essendon played 13 matches in its first season, winning seven, with four draws and losing two. The club was one of the inaugural junior members of the Victorian Football Association (VFA) in 1877, and began competing as a senior club from the 1878 season. During its early years in the Association, Essendon played its home matches at Flemington Hill, but moved to the East Melbourne Cricket Ground in 1881.\nIn 1878, Essendon played in the first match on what would be considered by modern standards to be a full-sized field at Flemington Hill. In 1879 Essendon played Melbourne in one of the earliest night matches recorded when the ball was painted white. In 1883 the team played four matches in eight days in Adelaide: losing to Norwood (on 23 June), and defeating Port Adelaide (on 16 June), a combined South Australian team (on 18 June), and South Adelaide (on 20 June).\nIn 1891 Essendon won their first VFA premiership, which they repeated in 1892, 1893 and 1894. One of the club's greatest players, Albert Thurgood played for the club during this period, making his debut in 1892. Essendon (18 wins, 2 draws) was undefeated in the 1893 season.\nFounding of the VFL to World War I (1897\u20131915).\nAt the end of the 1896 season Essendon along with seven other clubs formed the Victorian Football League. Essendon's first VFL game was in 1897 was against Geelong at Corio Oval in Geelong. Essendon won its first VFL premiership by winning the 1897 VFL finals series. Essendon again won the premiership in 1901, defeating Collingwood in the Grand Final. The club won successive premierships in 1911 and 1912 over Collingwood and South Melbourne respectively.\n\"Same Olds\".\nThe club is recorded as having played at McCracken's Paddock, Glass' Paddock and Flemington Hill. It is likely that these are three different names for the one ground, given that McCracken's Paddock was a parcel of land that sat within the larger Glass's Paddock which in turn was situated in an area widely known at the time as Flemington Hill. In 1882 the club moved home games to the East Melbourne Cricket Ground, (since gone) after an application to play on the Essendon Cricket Ground (later known as Windy Hill) was voted down by then Lord Mayor James Taylor on the basis that City of Essendon the mayor considered the Essendon Cricket Ground \"to be suitable only for the gentleman's game of cricket\",\nThe club became known by the nickname \"the Same Old Essendon\", from the title and hook of the principal song performed by a band of supporters which regularly occupied a section of the grandstand at the club's games. The nickname first appeared in print in the local \"North Melbourne Advertiser\" in 1889, and ended up gaining wide use, often as the diminutive \"Same Olds\".\nThis move away from Essendon, at a time when fans would walk to their local ground, didn't go down too well with many Essendon people; and, as a consequence, a new team and club was formed in 1900, unconnected with the first (although it played in the same colours), that was based at the Essendon Cricket Ground, and playing in the Victorian Football Association. It was known firstly as Essendon Town and, after 1905, as Essendon (although it was often called Essendon A, with the A standing for association).\nReturn to suburban Essendon (1921\u20131932).\nAfter the 1921 season, the East Melbourne Cricket Ground was closed and demolished to expand the Flinders Street Railyard. Having played at the East Melbourne Cricket Ground from 1882 to 1921, and having won four VFA premierships (1891\u20131894) and four VFL premierships (1897, 1901, 1911 and 1912) whilst there, Essendon was looking for a new home, and was offered grounds at the current Royal Melbourne Showgrounds, at Victoria Park, at Arden St, North Melbourne, and the Essendon Cricket Ground. The Essendon City Council offered the (VFL) team the Essendon Cricket Ground, announcing that it would be prepared to spend over \u00a312,000 on improvements, including a new grandstand, scoreboard and re-fencing of the oval.\nThe club's first preference was to move to North Melbourne \u2013 a move which the North Melbourne Football Club (then in the VFA) saw as an opportunity to get into the VFL. Most of Essendon's members and players were from the North Melbourne area, and sportswriters believed that Essendon would have been taken over by or rebranded as North Melbourne within only a few years of the move. However, the VFA, desperate for its own strategic reasons not to lose its use of the North Melbourne Cricket Ground, successfully appealed to the State Government to block Essendon's move to North Melbourne. With its preferred option off the table, the club returned to Essendon, and the Essendon VFA club disbanded, with most of its players moving to North Melbourne.\nThe old \"Same Olds\" nickname fell into disuse, and by 1922 the other nicknames \"Sash Wearers\" and \"Essendonians\" that had been variously used from time to time were also abandoned. The team became universally known as \"the Dons\" (from EssenDON); it was not until much later, during the War years of the early 1940s, that they became known as \"The Bombers\" \u2013 due to Windy Hill's proximity to the Essendon Aerodrome.\nIn the 1922 season, playing in Essendon for the first time in decades, Essendon reached the final four for the first time since 1912, finishing in third place. In the 1923 season the club topped the ladder with 13 wins from 16 games. After a 17-point second semi final loss to South Melbourne defeated Fitzroy (who had beaten South Melbourne) in the challenge final: Essendon 8.15 (63) to Fitzroy 6.10 (46). Amongst Essendon's best players were half forward flanker George \"Tich\" Shorten, centre half forward Justin McCarthy, centre half back Tom Fitzmaurice, rover Frank Maher and wingman Jack Garden.\nThis was one of Essendon's most famous sides, dubbed the \"Mosquito Fleet\", due to the number of small, very fast players in the side. Six players were 5'6\" (167\u00a0cm) or smaller.\nThe 1924 season proved to be arguably the strangest year in Essendon's entire history. For the first time since 1897 there was no ultimate match \u2013 either \"Challenge Final\" or \"Grand Final\" \u2013 to determine the premiers; instead, the top four clubs after the home and away season played a round-robin to determine the premiers. Essendon, having previously defeated both Fitzroy (by 40 points) and South Melbourne (by 33 points), clinched the premiership by means of a 20-point loss to Richmond. With the Tigers having already lost a match to Fitzroy by a substantial margin, the Dons were declared premiers by virtue of their superior percentage, meaning that Essendon again managed to win successive premierships. But the poor crowds for the finals meant this was never attempted again, resulting in Essendon having the unique record of winning the only two premierships without a grand final.\nProminent contributors to Essendon's 1924 Premiership success included back pocket Clyde Donaldson, follower Norm Beckton, half back flanker Roy Laing, follower Charlie May and rover Charlie Hardy.\nThe 1924 season was not without controversy, with rumours of numerous players accepting bribes. Regardless of the accuracy of these allegations, the club's image was tarnished, and the side experienced its lowest period during the decade that followed, with poor results on the field and decreased support off it.\nThere was worse to follow, with various Essendon players publicly blaming each other for the poor performance against Richmond, and then, with dissension still rife in the ranks, the side plummeted to an humiliating 28-point loss to VFA premiers Footscray in a special charity match played a week later in front of 46,100 people, in aid of \"Dame Nellie Melba's Limbless Soldiers' Appeal Fund\", purportedly (but not officially) for the championship of Victoria.\nThe club's fortunes dipped alarmingly, and persistently. Indeed, after finishing third in the 1926 season, it was to be 14 years before Essendon would even contest a finals series.\nDick Reynolds years (1933\u20131960).\nThe 1933 season, was probably the start of the Essendon revival, seeing the debut of the player regarded as one of Essendon's greatest players Dick Reynolds. His impact was immediate. He won his first Brownlow Medal aged 19. His record of three Brownlow victories (1934, 1937, 1938), equalled Haydn Bunton, Sr (1931, 1932, 1935), and later equalled by Bob Skilton (1959, 1963, 1968), and Ian Stewart (1965, 1966, 1971).\nReynolds went on to arguably even greater achievements as a coach, a position to which he was first appointed, jointly with Harry Hunter, in 1939 (this was while Reynolds was still a player). A year later he took the reins on a solo basis and was rewarded with immediate success (at least in terms of expectations at the time which, after so long in the wilderness, were somewhat modest). He was regarded as having a sound tactical knowledge of the game and being an inspirational leader, as he led the side into the finals in 1940 for the first time since 1926, when the side finished 3rd. Melbourne, which defeated Essendon by just 5 points in the preliminary final, later went on to trounce Richmond by 39 points in the grand final.\nThe Essendon Football Club adopted the nickname The Bombers in April 1940.\n1941 brought Essendon's first grand final appearance since 1923, but the side again lowered its colours to Melbourne. A year later war broke out and the competition was considerably weakened, with Geelong being forced to pull out of the competition due to travel restrictions as a result of petrol rationing. Attendances at games also declined dramatically, whilst some clubs had to move from their normal grounds due to them being used for military purposes. Many players were lost to football due to their military service. Nevertheless, Essendon went on to win the 1942 Premiership with Western Australian Wally Buttsworth in irrepressible form at centre half back. Finally, the long-awaited premiership was Essendon's after comprehensively outclassing Richmond in the grand final, 19.18 (132) to 11.13 (79). The match was played at Carlton in front of 49,000 spectators.\nIn any case, there could be no such reservations about Essendon's next premiership, which came just four years later. Prior to that Essendon lost a hard-fought grand final to Richmond in 1943 by 5 points, finished 3rd in 1944, and dropped to 8th in 1945.\nAfter World War II, Essendon enjoyed great success. In the five years immediately after the war, Essendon won 3 premierships (1946, 1949, 1950) and were runners up twice (1947, 1948). In 1946, Essendon were clearly the VFL's supreme force, topping the ladder after the roster games and surviving a drawn second semi final against Collingwood to win through to the grand final a week later with a 10.16 (76) to 8.9 (57). Then, in the grand final against Melbourne, Essendon set a grand final record score of 22.18 (150) to Melbourne 13.9 (87), with 7 goal centre half forward Gordon Lane. Rover Bill Hutchinson, and defenders Wally Buttsworth, Cec Ruddell and Harold Lambert among the best players.\nThe 1947 Grand Final has to go down in the ledger as 'one of the ones that got away', Essendon losing to Carlton by a single point despite managing 30 scoring shots to 21. As if to prove that lightning does occasionally strike twice, the second of the 'ones that got away' came just a year later, the Dons finishing with a lamentable 7.27, to tie with Melbourne (who managed 10.9) in the 1948 grand final. A week later Essendon waved the premiership good-bye, as Melbourne raced to a 13.11 (89) to 7.8 (50) triumph. The club's Annual Report made an assessment that was at once restrained and, as was soon to emerge, tacitly and uncannily prophetic:\nIt is very apparent that no team is complete without a spearhead and your committee has high hopes of rectifying that fault this coming season.\nThe 1949 season heralded the arrival on the VFL scene of John Coleman, arguably the greatest player in Essendon's history, and, in the view of some, the finest player the game has known. In his first ever appearance for the Dons, against Hawthorn in Round 1 1949, he booted 12 of his side's 18 goals to create an opening round record which was to endure for forty five years. More importantly, however, he went on to maintain the same high level of performance throughout the season, kicking precisely 100 goals for the year to become the first player to top the ton since Richmond's Jack Titus in 1940.\nThe Coleman factor was just what Essendon needed to enable them to take that vital final step to premiership glory, but even so it was not until the business end of the season that this became clear. Essendon struggled to make the finals in 4th place, but once there they suddenly ignited to put in one of the most consistently devastating September performances in VFL history.\nCollingwood succumbed first as the Dons powered their way to an 82-point first semi final victory, and a fortnight later it was the turn of the North Melbourne Football Club as Essendon won the preliminary final a good deal more comfortably than the ultimate margin of 17 points suggested. In the grand final, Essendon were pitted against Carlton and in a match that was a total travesty as a contest they overwhelmed the Blues to the tune of 73 points, 18.17 (125) to 6.16 (52). Best for the Dons included pacy aboriginal half back flanker Norm McDonald, ruckman Bob McLure, and rovers Bill Hutchinson and Ron McEwin. John Coleman also did well, registering 6 majors.\nA year later Essendon were if anything even more dominant, defeating the North Melbourne Football Club in both the second semi final and the grand final to secure consecutive VFL premierships for the third time. Best afield in the grand final in what was officially his swansong as a player was captain-coach Dick Reynolds, who received sterling support from the likes of Norm McDonald, ruckman/back pocket Wally May, back pocket Les Gardiner, and big Bob McLure.\nWith 'King Richard' still holding court as coach in 1951, albeit now in a non-playing capacity, Essendon seemed on course for a third consecutive flag but a controversial four-week suspension dished out to John Coleman on the eve of the finals effectively put paid to their chances. Coleman was reported for retaliation after twice being struck by his Carlton opponent, Harry Caspar, and without him the Dons were rated a 4 goals poorer team. Nevertheless, they still managed to battle their way to a 6th successive grand final with wins over Footscray by 8 points in the first semi final and Collingwood by 2 points in the preliminary final.\nThe Dons sustained numerous injuries in the preliminary final and the selectors sprang a surprise on grand final day by naming the officially retired Dick Reynolds as 20th man. 'King Richard' was powerless to prevent the inevitable, although leading at half time, the Geelong kicked five goals to two points in the third quarter to set up victory by 11 points.\nEssendon slumped to 8th in 1952 but John Coleman was in irrepressible form managing 103 goals for the year. Hugh Buggy noted in \"The Argus\": \"It was the wettest season for twenty-two years and Coleman showed that since the war he was without peer in the art of goal kicking.\"\nTwo seasons later Coleman's career was ended after he dislocated a knee during the Round 8 clash with the North Melbourne Football Club at Essendon. Aged just twenty-five, he had kicked 537 goals in only 98 VFL games in what was generally a fairly low scoring period for the game. His meteoric rise and fall were clearly the stuff of legend, and few if any players, either before or since, have had such an immense impact over so brief a period.\nAccording to Alf Brown, football writer for \"The Herald\":\nSomewhat more colourful, R.S. Whittington suggested,\nWithout Coleman, Essendon's fortunes plummeted, and there were to be no further premierships in the 1950s. The nearest miss came in 1957 when the Bombers (as they were popularly known by this time) earned premiership favouritism after a superb 16-point second semi final defeat of Melbourne, only to lose by over 10 goals against the same side a fortnight later.\n1959 saw another grand final loss to Melbourne, this time by 37 points, but the fact that the average age of the Essendon side was only 22 was seen as providing considerable cause for optimism. However, it was to take another three years, and a change of coach, before the team's obvious potential was translated into tangible success.\nPost-Reynolds era and the \"Slugging Seventies\" (1961\u20131980).\nJohn Coleman started his coaching career at Essendon in 1961, thus ending the Dick Reynolds era at the club. In the same year Essendon finished the season mid table and supporters were not expecting too much for the following season. However, the club blitzed the opposition in this year, losing only two matches and finishing top of the table. Both losses were to the previous year's grand finalists. The finals posed no problems for the resurgent Dons, easily accounting for Carlton in the season's climax, winning the 1962 Premiership. This was a remarkable result for Coleman who in his second season of coaching pulled off the ultimate prize in Australian football. As so often is the case after a flag, the following two years were below standard. A further premiership in 1965 (won from 4th position on the ladder), was also unexpected due to periods of poor form during the season. The Bombers were a different club when the finals came around, but some of the credit for the improvement was given to the influence of Brian Sampson and Ted Fordham during the finals. Coleman's time as coach turned out to be much like his playing career: highly successful but cut short when he had to stand down due to health problems in 1967. Only six years later, on the eve of the 1973 season, he died of a heart-attack at just 44 years of age.\nFollowing Coleman's retirement, the club experienced tough times on and off the field. Finals appearances were rare for the side, which was often in contention for the wooden spoon. Essendon did manage to make the 1968 VFL Grand Final, but lost to Carlton by just three points and did not make it back to the big stage for a decade-and-a-half.\nDuring the period from 1968 until 1980, five different coaches were tried, with none lasting longer than four years. Off the field the club went through troubled times as well. In 1970 five players went on strike before the season even began, demanding higher payments. Essendon did make the finals in 1972 and 1973 under the autocratic direction of Des Tuddenham (Collingwood) but they were beaten badly in successive elimination finals by St. Kilda and did not taste finals action again until the very end of the decade. The 70s Essendon sides were involved in many rough and tough encounters under Tuddenham, who himself came to loggerheads with Ron Barassi at a quarter time huddle where both coaches exchanged heated words. Essendon had tough, but talented players with the likes of \"Rotten Ronnie\" Ron Andrews and experienced players such as Barry Davis, Ken Fletcher, Geoff Blethyn, Neville Fields and West Australian import Graham Moss. In May 1974, a controversial half time all-in-brawl with Richmond at Windy Hill and a 1975 encounter with Carlton were testimony of the era. Following the Carlton match, the 'Herald' described Windy Hill as \"Boot Hill\", because of the extent of the fights and the high number of reported players (eight in all \u2013 four from Carlton and four from Essendon). The peak of these incidents occurred in 1980 with new recruit Phil Carman making headlines for head-butting an umpire. The tribunal suspended him for sixteen weeks, and although most people thought this was a fair (or even lenient) sentence, he took his case to the supreme court, gathering even more unwanted publicity for the club. Despite this, the club had recruited many talented young players in the late 70s who emerged as club greats. Three of those young players were Simon Madden, Tim Watson and Paul Van Der Haar. Terry Daniher and his brother Neale came via a trade with South Melbourne, and Roger Merrett joined soon afterwards to form the nucleus of what would become the formidable Essendon sides of the 1980s. This raw but talented group of youngsters took Essendon to an elimination final in 1979 under Barry Davis but were again thrashed in an Elimination Final, this time at the hands of Fitzroy. Davis resigned at the end of the 1980 season after missing out on a finals appearance.\nOne of the few highlights for Essendon supporters during this time was when Graham Moss won the 1976 Brownlow Medal; he was the only Bomber to do so in a 40-year span from 1953 to 1993. Even that was bittersweet as he quit VFL football to move back to his native Western Australia, where Moss finished out his career as a player and coach at Claremont Football Club. In many ways, Moss' career reflects Essendon's mixed fortunes during the decade.\nKevin Sheedy era (1981\u20132007).\nFormer Richmond player Kevin Sheedy started as head coach in 1981.\nEssendon reached the Grand Final in 1983, the first time since 1968. Hawthorn won by a then record 83 points.\nIn 1984, Essendon won the pre-season competition and completed the regular season on top of the ladder. The club played, and beat, Hawthorn in the 1984 VFL Grand Final to win their 13th premiership\u2014their first since 1965. The teams met again in the 1985 Grand Final, which Essendon also won. At the start of 1986, Essendon were considered unbackable for three successive flags, but a succession of injuries to key players Paul Van der Haar (only fifteen games from 1986 to 1988), Tim Watson, Darren Williams, Roger Merrett and Simon Madden led the club to win only eight of its last eighteen games in 1986 and only nine games (plus a draw with Geelong) in 1987. In July 1987, the Bombers suffered a humiliation at the hands of Sydney, who fell two points short of scoring the then highest score in VFL history.\nIn 1988, Essendon made a rebound to sixth place with twelve wins, including a 140-point thrashing of Brisbane where they had a record sixteen individual goalkickers. In 1989, they rebounded further to second on the ladder with only five losses and thrashed Geelong in the Qualifying Final. However, after a fiery encounter with Hawthorn ended in a convincing defeat, the Bombers were no match for Geelong next week.\nIn 1990, Essendon were pace-setters almost from the start, but a disruption from the Qualifying Final draw between Collingwood and West Coast was a blow from which they never recovered. The Magpies comprehensively thrashed them in both the second semi final and the grand final.\nFollowing the 1991 season, Essendon moved its home games from its traditional home ground at Windy Hill to the larger and newly renovated MCG. This move generated large increases in game attendance, membership and revenue for the club. The club's training and administrative base remained at Windy Hill until 2013.\nFollowing the retirement of Tim Watson and Simon Madden in the early 1990s, the team was built on new players such as Gavin Wanganeen, Joe Misiti, Mark Mercuri, Michael Long, Dustin Fletcher (son of Ken) and James Hird, who was taken at No. 79 in the 1992 draft. This side became known as the \"Baby Bombers\", as the core of the side was made up of young players early in their careers.\nThe team won the 1993 Grand Final against Carlton and that same year, Gavin Wanganeen won the Brownlow Medal, the first awarded to an Essendon player since 1976. Three years later, James Hird was jointly awarded the medal with Michael Voss of Brisbane.\nIn 2000, Essendon won 20 consecutive matches before they lost to the Western Bulldogs in round 21. The team went on to win their 16th premiership, defeating , thereby completing the most dominant single season in AFL/VFL history. The defeat to the Bulldogs was the only defeat for Essendon throughout the entire calendar year (Essendon also won the 2000 pre-season competition).\nEssendon was less successful after 2001. Lucrative contracts to a number of premiership players had caused serious pressure on the club's salary cap, forcing the club to trade several key players. Blake Caracella, Chris Heffernan, Justin Blumfield, Gary Moorcroft and Damien Hardwick had all departed by the end of 2002; in 2004, Mark Mercuri, Sean Wellman and Joe Misiti retired. The club remained competitive; however, they could progress no further than the second week of the finals each year for the years of 2002, 2003, and 2004. Sheedy signed a new three-year contract at the end of 2004.\nIn 2005, Essendon missed the finals for the first time since 1997; and in 2006, the club suffered its worst season under Sheedy, and its worst for more than 70 years, finishing second-last with only three wins (one of which was against defending premiers , in which newly appointed captain Matthew Lloyd kicked eight goals) and one draw from twenty-two games. Lloyd had replaced James Hird as captain at the start of the season, but after suffering a season-ending hamstring injury two weeks after his phenomenal performance against Leo Barry, David Hille was appointed captain for the remainder of the season. The club improved its on-field position in 2007, but again missed the finals.\nOn field and relocation to Melbourne Airport (2008\u20132012).\nSheedy's contract was not renewed after 2007, ending his 27-year tenure as Essendon coach. Matthew Knights replaced Sheedy as coach, and coached the club for three seasons, reaching the finals once \u2013 an eighth-place finish in 2009 at the expense of reigning premiers . On 29 August 2010, shortly after the end of the 2010 home-and-away season, Knights was dismissed as coach.\nOn 28 September 2010, former captain James Hird was named as Essendon's new coach from 2011 on a four-year deal. Former dual premiership winning coach and Essendon triple-premiership winning player Mark Thompson later joined Hird on the coaching panel. In his first season, Essendon finished eighth. The club started strongly in 2012, sitting fourth with a 10\u20133 record at the halfway mark of the season; but the club won only one more match for the season, finishing eleventh to miss the finals.\nIn 2013 the club moved its training and administrative base to the True Value Solar Centre, a new facility in the suburb of Melbourne Airport which it had developed in conjunction with the Australian Paralympic Committee. Essendon holds a 37-year lease at the facility, and maintains a lease at Windy Hill to use the venue for home matches for its reserves team in the Victorian Football League, and for a social club and merchandise store on the site.\nASADA/WADA investigation (2013\u20132016).\nDuring 2013, the club was investigated by the AFL and the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority (ASADA) over its 2012 player supplements and sports science program, most specifically over allegations into illegal use of peptide supplements. An internal review found it to have \"established a supplements program that was experimental, inappropriate and inadequately vetted and controlled\", and on 27 August 2013, the club was found guilty of bringing the game into disrepute for this reason. Among its penalties, the club was fined A$2 million, stripped of early draft picks in the following two drafts, and forfeited its place in the 2013 finals series (having originally finished seventh on the ladder); Hird was suspended from coaching for twelve months. Several office-bearers also resigned their posts during the controversy, including chairman David Evans and CEO Ian Robson.\nIn the midst of the supplements saga, assistant coach Mark Thompson took over as coach for the 2014 season during Hird's suspension. He led the club back to the finals for a seventh-place finish but in a tense first elimination final against archrivals North Melbourne, the Bombers led by as much as 27 points at half time before a resurgent Kangaroos side came back and won the game by 12 points. After the 2014 season, Mark Thompson left the club to make way for Hird's return to the senior coaching role.\nIn June 2014, thirty-four players were issued show-cause notices alleging the use of banned peptide Thymosin beta-4 during the program. The players faced the AFL Anti-Doping Tribunal over the 2014/15 offseason, and on 31 March 2015 the tribunal returned a not guilty verdict, determining that it was \"not comfortably satisfied\" that the players had been administered the peptide.\nHird returned as senior coach for the 2015 season, and after a strong start, the club's form severely declined after the announcement that WADA would appeal the decision of the AFL Anti-Doping Tribunal. The effect of the appeal on the team's morale was devastating and they went on to win only six games for the year. Under extreme pressure, Hird resigned on 18 August 2015 following a disastrous 112-point loss to Adelaide. Former West Coast Eagles premiership coach John Worsfold was appointed as the new senior coach on a three-year contract.\nOn 12 January 2016 the Court of Arbitration for Sport overruled the AFL anti-doping tribunal's decision, deeming that 34 past and present players of the Essendon Football Club, took the banned substance Thymosin Beta-4. As a result, all 34 players, 12 of which were still at the club, were given two-year suspensions. However, all suspensions were effectively less due to players having previously taken part in provisional suspensions undertaken during the 2014/2015 off-season. \nAs a result, Essendon contested the 2016 season with twelve of its regular senior players under suspension. In order for the club to remain competitive, the AFL granted Essendon the ability to upgrade all five of their rookie listed players and to sign an additional ten players to cover the loss of the suspended players for the season.\nDue to this unprecedented situation, many in the football community predicted the club would go through the 2016 AFL season without a win; however, they were able to win three matches: against , and in rounds 2, 21 and 23 respectively. The absence of its most experienced players also allowed the development of its young players, with Zach Merrett and Orazio Fantasia having breakout years, while Darcy Parish and Anthony McDonald-Tipungwuti, impressing in their debut seasons. Merrett acted as captain in the side's round 21 win over the Suns. The club eventually finished on the bottom of the ladder and thus claimed its first wooden spoon since 1933.\nPost-investigation (2017\u2013present).\nEssendon made their final financial settlement related to the supplements saga in September 2017, just before finals started. They also improved vastly on their 2016 performance, finishing 7th in the home and away season and becoming the first team since in 2011 to go from wooden spooner to a finals appearance, but ultimately losing their only final to .\nThe 2017 season was also capped off by the retirement of much-loved club legend and ex-captain Jobe Watson, midfielder Brent Stanton, and ex-Geelong star James Kelly, who later took up a development coach role at the club. Midfielder Heath Hocking, who played 126 games for the club, was delisted.\nExpectations were high for the 2018 season, with the club having an outstanding offseason. The recruitment of Jake Stringer, Adam Saad and Devon Smith from the Western Bulldogs, Gold Coast Suns and Greater Western Sydney Giants respectively was expected to throw Essendon firmly into premiership contention.\nAfter beating the previous year's runner up (which went on to beat reigning premiers the following round) in round one, Essendon's form slumped severely, only winning one game out of the next seven rounds and losing to the then-winless Carlton in round eight. Senior assistant coach Mark Neeld was sacked by the club the following Monday.\nThe team's form improved sharply after this, recording wins against top eight sides Geelong, GWS, eventual premiers West Coast and Sydney, and winning ten out of the last 13 games of the season. However, the mid-season revival was short-lived, with a loss to reigning premiers by eight points in round 22 ending any hopes they had of reaching the finals.\nThe 2018 season was capped off by the club not offering veteran Brendon Goddard a new contract for 2019.\nEssendon acquired Dylan Shiel from in one of the most high-profile trades of the 2018 AFL Trade Period. The Bombers had inconsistent form throughout the 2019 season but qualified for the finals for the second time in three seasons, finishing eighth on the ladder with 12 wins and 10 losses. The Bombers, however, were no match for the West Coast Eagles in the first elimination final and lost by 55 points to end their season. The defeat extended their 15-year finals winning drought, having not won a final since 2004.\nFollowing the end of the 2019 season, assistant coach Ben Rutten was announced as John Worsfold's successor as senior coach, effective at the end of the 2020 AFL season. Rutten effectively shared co-coaching duties with Worsfold during the 2020 season.\n2020 was a particularly disappointing year for the club. The Bombers failed to make the finals, finishing thirteenth on the AFL ladder with just six wins and a draw from 17 games. Conor McKenna became the first AFL player to test positive to COVID-19 during the pandemic.\nClub symbols.\nGuernsey.\nEssendon's first recorded jumpers were navy blue (The Footballers, edited by Thomas Power, 1875) although the club wore 'red and black caps and hose'. In 1877 The Footballers records the addition of 'a red sash over left shoulder'. This is the first time a red sash as part of the club jumper and by 1878 there are newspaper reports referring to Essendon players as 'the men in the sash'.\nGiven that blue and navy blue were the most popular colours at the time it is thought that Essendon adopted a red sash in 1877 to distinguish its players from others in similar coloured jumpers.\nClash jumpers.\nIn 2007, the AFL Commission laid down the requirement that all clubs must produce an alternative jumper for use in matches where jumpers are considered to clash. From 2007 to 2011, the Essendon clash guernsey was the same design as its home guernsey, but with a substantially wider sash such that the guernsey was predominantly red rather than predominantly black. This was changed after 2011 when the AFL deemed that the wider sash did not provide sufficient contrast.\nFrom 2012 to 2016, Essendon's clash guernsey was predominantly grey, with a red sash fimbriated in black; the grey field contained, in small print, the names of all Essendon premiership players.\nBefore the 2016 season, Essendon's changed their clash guernsey to a predominantly red one, featuring a red sash in black. Similar to the grey jumper, the names of Essendon premiership players were also printed outside the sash.\nYellow armbands.\nFollowing Adam Ramanauskas' personal battle with cancer, a \"Clash for Cancer\" match against was launched in 2006. This was a joint venture between Essendon and the Cancer Council of Victoria to raise funds for the organisation. Despite a formal request to the AFL being denied, players wore yellow armbands for the match which resulted in the club being fined $20,000. In 2007, the AFL agreed to allow yellow armbands to be incorporated into the left sleeve of the jumper. The 'Clash for Cancer' match against Melbourne has become an annual event, repeated in subsequent seasons, though in 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2016, (twice), the Sydney Swans and Brisbane Lions were the opponents in those respective seasons instead of Melbourne. In 2009, the jumpers were auctioned along with yellow boots worn by some players during the match.\nClub song.\nThe club's theme song, \"See the Bombers Fly Up\", is thought to have been written c. 1959 by Kevin Andrews in the home of player Jeff Gamble at which time Kevin Andrews was living. The song is based on the tune of Johnnie Hamp's 1929 song \"(Keep Your) Sunny Side Up\" at an increased tempo. Jeff Gamble came up with the line 'See the bombers fly up, up' while Kevin Andrews contributed all or most of the rest. At the time, \"(Keep Your) Sunny Side Up\" was the theme song for the popular Melbourne-based TV show on Channel 7 \"Sunnyside Up\". The official version of the song was recorded in 1972 by the Fable Singers and is still used today.\nThe song, as with all other AFL clubs, is played prior to every match and at the conclusion of matches when the team is victorious.\nSongwriter Mike Brady, of \"Up There Cazaly\" fame, penned an updated version of the song in 1999 complete with a new verse arrangement, but it was not well received. However, this version is occasionally played at club functions.\nMascot.\nThe club's mascot is named \"Skeeta Reynolds\". Named after Dick Reynolds, he is a mosquito and was created in honour of the team's back-to-back premiership sides in the 1920s known as the \"Mosquito Fleet\". He was first named through a competition run in the Bomber magazine with \"Skeeta\" being the winning entry. This was later changed to \"Skeeta Reynolds\". He appears as a red mosquito in an Essendon jumper and wears a red and black scarf.\nRivalries.\nEssendon has a four-way rivalry with , , and being the four biggest and most supported clubs in Victoria. Matches between the clubs are often close regardless of form and ladder positions. If out of the race themselves, all four have the desire to deny the others a finals spot or a premiership. Essendon also has a fierce rivalry with Hawthorn stemming from the 1980s. This rivalry was made even more heated when Matthew Lloyd knocked out Brad Sewell with a bump. This then led to an all in brawl between both sides.\nOrganisation and finance.\nBoard.\nLindsay Tanner has served as chairman of the board since late 2015.\nEssendon's board members are Paul Brasher, Melissa Verner Green, Sean Wellman, David Barham, Catherine Lio, Ken Lay, Simon Madden, Andrew Muir, Lindsay Tanner and Peter Allen.\nSponsorship.\nThe club's apparel is currently produced by Under Armour. The club's apparel has also been produced by Reebok, Fila, Puma, Adidas and ISC.\nHonours.\n\"See Essendon Football Club honours.\"\nTeam of the Century.\nTo celebrate the 125th anniversary of the club, as well as 100 years of the VFL/AFL, Essendon announced its \"Team of the Century\" in 1997.\nChampions of Essendon.\nIn 2002, a club panel chose and ranked the 25 greatest players to have played for Essendon.\nReserves team.\nThe Essendon reserves team first competed in the Victorian Football League's reserves competition when the competition was established in 1919. The team enjoyed success in the form of eight premierships between 1919 and 1999, including the last Victorian State Football League year in 1999. From 2000 until 2002, the club's reserves team competed in the new Victorian Football League competition.\nAt the end of 2002, the club dissolved its reserves team and established a reserves affiliation with the Bendigo Football Club in the VFL. The affiliation ran for ten years from 2003 until 2012, allowing reserves players from the Essendon list to play with Bendigo.\nThe club re-established its reserves team in 2013, seeking greater developmental autonomy. The reserves team has since competed in the VFL. The team plays its home games at Windy Hill. The team is made up of AFL senior listed players and VFL contracted players.\n Essendon refused to play the Grand Final in Geelong, so the premiership was awarded to Geelong.\nWomen's team.\nEssendon has fielded a team in the VFL Women's (VFLW) competition since the 2018 season. The league is the highest-grade competition for female footballers in Victoria and one of three second-tier female competitions underneath the national AFL Women's (AFLW) league. Essendon is one of four AFL clubs not to field a team in the AFLW, and were unsuccessful in their bid for a license to join the competition in 2019.\nSeason summaries.\nVFL Women's\nOther ventures.\nThe same month, Essendon also entered E-Sports by acquiring Australian \"League of Legends\" team Abyss ESports. This made them the second AFL team to acquire an E-Sports division after Adelaide acquired Legacy ESports in May.\nIn 2018 the Essendon Football Club along with four other AFL clubs entered the Victorian Wheelchair Football League"}
{"id": "10258", "revid": "40889015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10258", "title": "Enid Blyton", "text": "Enid Mary Blyton (11 August 1897\u00a0\u2013 28 November 1968) was an English children's writer whose books have been among the world's best-sellers since the 1930s, selling more than 600 million copies. Blyton's books are still enormously popular, and have been translated into 90 languages. As of June 2018, Blyton is in the 4th place for the most translated author. She wrote on a wide range of topics including education, natural history, fantasy, mystery, and biblical narratives and is best remembered today for her Noddy, Famous Five, Secret Seven, and Malory Towers.\nHer first book, \"Child Whispers\", a 24-page collection of poems, was published in 1922. Following the commercial success of her early novels such as \"Adventures of the Wishing-Chair\" (1937) and \"The Enchanted Wood\" (1939), Blyton went on to build a literary empire, sometimes producing fifty books a year in addition to her prolific magazine and newspaper contributions. Her writing was unplanned and sprang largely from her unconscious mind: she typed her stories as events unfolded before her. The sheer volume of her work and the speed with which it was produced led to rumours that Blyton employed an army of ghost writers, a charge she vigorously denied.\nBlyton's work became increasingly controversial among literary critics, teachers and parents from the 1950s onwards, because of the alleged unchallenging nature of her writing and the themes of her books, particularly the Noddy series. Some libraries and schools banned her works, which the BBC had refused to broadcast from the 1930s until the 1950s, because they were perceived to lack literary merit. Her books have been criticised as being elitist, sexist, racist, xenophobic and at odds with the more progressive environment emerging in post-Second World War Britain, but they have continued to be best-sellers since her death in 1968.\nShe felt she had a responsibility to provide her readers with a strong moral framework, so she encouraged them to support worthy causes. In particular, through the clubs she set up or supported, she encouraged and organised them to raise funds for animal and paediatric charities. The story of Blyton's life was dramatised in a BBC film entitled \"Enid\", featuring Helena Bonham Carter in the title role and first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Four in 2009. There have also been several adaptations of her books for stage, screen and television.\nEarly life and education.\nEnid Blyton was born on 11 August 1897 in East Dulwich, South London, United Kingdom, the oldest of the three children, to Thomas Carey Blyton (1870\u20131920), a cutlery salesman; (the 1911 census records his occupation as Mantle Manufacturer dealer, women's suits, skirts, etc), and his wife Theresa Mary (\"n\u00e9e\" Harrison; 1874\u20131950). Enid's younger brothers, Hanly (1899\u20131983) and Carey (1902\u20131976), were born after the family had moved to a semi-detached villa in Beckenham, then a village in Kent. A few months after her birth Enid almost died from whooping cough, but was nursed back to health by her father, whom she adored. Thomas Blyton ignited Enid's interest in nature; in her autobiography she wrote that he \"loved flowers and birds and wild animals, and knew more about them than anyone I had ever met\". He also passed on his interest in gardening, art, music, literature and the theatre, and the pair often went on nature walks, much to the disapproval of Enid's mother, who showed little interest in her daughter's pursuits. Enid was devastated when he left the family shortly after her thirteenth birthday to live with another woman. Enid and her mother did not have a good relationship, and she did not attend either of her parents' funerals.\nFrom 1907 to 1915 Blyton attended St Christopher's School in Beckenham, where she enjoyed physical activities and became school tennis champion and captain of lacrosse. She was not so keen on all the academic subjects but excelled in writing, and in 1911 she entered Arthur Mee's children's poetry competition. Mee offered to print her verses, encouraging her to produce more. Blyton's mother considered her efforts at writing to be a \"waste of time and money\", but she was encouraged to persevere by Mabel Attenborough, the aunt of school friend Mary Potter.\nBlyton's father taught her to play the piano, which she mastered well enough for him to believe that she might follow in his sister's footsteps and become a professional musician. Blyton considered enrolling at the Guildhall School of Music, but decided she was better suited to becoming a writer. After finishing school in 1915 as head girl, she moved out of the family home to live with her friend Mary Attenborough, before going to stay with George and Emily Hunt at Seckford Hall near Woodbridge in Suffolk. Seckford Hall, with its allegedly haunted room and secret passageway provided inspiration for her later writing. At Woodbridge Congregational Church Blyton met Ida Hunt, who taught at Ipswich High School, and suggested that she train there as a teacher. Blyton was introduced to the children at the nursery school, and recognising her natural affinity with them she enrolled in a National Froebel Union teacher training course at the school in September 1916. By this time she had almost ceased contact with her family.\nBlyton's manuscripts had been rejected by publishers on many occasions, which only made her more determined to succeed: \"it is partly the struggle that helps you so much, that gives you determination, character, self-reliance\u00a0\u2013 all things that help in any profession or trade, and most certainly in writing\". In March 1916 her first poems were published in \"Nash's Magazine\". She completed her teacher training course in December 1918, and the following month obtained a teaching appointment at Bickley Park School, a small independent establishment for boys in Bickley, Kent. Two months later Blyton received a teaching certificate with distinctions in zoology and principles of education, 1st class in botany, geography, practice and history of education, child hygiene and class teaching and 2nd class in literature and elementary mathematics. In 1920 she moved to Southernhay in Hook Road Surbiton as nursery governess to the four sons of architect Horace Thompson and his wife Gertrude, with whom Blyton spent four happy years. Owing to a shortage of schools in the area her charges were soon joined by the children of neighbours, and a small school developed at the house.\nEarly writing career.\nIn 1920 Blyton relocated to Chessington, and began writing in her spare time. The following year she won the \"Saturday Westminster Review\" writing competition with her essay \"On the Popular Fallacy that to the Pure All Things are Pure\". Publications such as \"The Londoner\", \"Home Weekly\" and \"The Bystander\" began to show an interest in her short stories and poems.\nBlyton's first book, \"Child Whispers\", a 24-page collection of poems, was published in 1922. It was illustrated by a schoolfriend, Phyllis Chase, who collaborated on several of her early works. Also in that year Blyton began writing in annuals for Cassell and George Newnes, and her first piece of writing, \"Peronel and his Pot of Glue\", was accepted for publication in \"Teachers' World\". Her success was boosted in 1923 when her poems were published alongside those of Rudyard Kipling, Walter de la Mare and G. K. Chesterton in a special issue of \"Teachers' World\". Blyton's educational texts were quite influential in the 1920s and '30s, her most sizeable being the three-volume \"The Teacher's Treasury\" (1926), the six-volume \"Modern Teaching\" (1928), the ten-volume \"Pictorial Knowledge\" (1930), and the four-volume \"Modern Teaching in the Infant School\" (1932).\nIn July 1923 Blyton published \"Real Fairies\", a collection of thirty-three poems written especially for the book with the exception of \"Pretending\", which had appeared earlier in \"Punch\" magazine. The following year she published \"The Enid Blyton Book of Fairies\", illustrated by Horace J. Knowles, and in 1926 the \"Book of Brownies\". Several books of plays appeared in 1927, including \"A Book of Little Plays\" and \"The Play's the Thing\" with the illustrator Alfred Bestall.\nIn the 1930s Blyton developed an interest in writing stories related to various myths, including those of ancient Greece and Rome; \"The Knights of the Round Table\", \"Tales of Ancient Greece\" and \"Tales of Robin Hood\" were published in 1930. In \"Tales of Ancient Greece\" Blyton retold sixteen well-known ancient Greek myths, but used the Latin rather than the Greek names of deities and invented conversations between the characters. \"The Adventures of Odysseus\", \"Tales of the Ancient Greeks and Persians\" and \"Tales of the Romans\" followed in 1934.\nCommercial success.\nNew series: 1934\u20131948.\nThe first of twenty-eight books in Blyton's Old Thatch series, \"The Talking Teapot and Other Tales\", was published in 1934, the same year as \"Brer Rabbit Retold\"; (note that Brer Rabbit originally featured in Uncle Remus stories by Joel Chandler Harris), her first serial story and first full-length book, \"Adventures of the Wishing-Chair\", followed in 1937. \"The Enchanted Wood\", the first book in the Faraway Tree series, published in 1939, is about a magic tree inspired by the Norse mythology that had fascinated Blyton as a child. According to Blyton's daughter Gillian the inspiration for the magic tree came from \"thinking up a story one day and suddenly she was walking in the enchanted wood and found the tree. In her imagination she climbed up through the branches and met Moon-Face, Silky, the Saucepan Man and the rest of the characters. She had all she needed.\" As in the Wishing-Chair series, these fantasy books typically involve children being transported into a magical world in which they meet fairies, goblins, elves, pixies and other mythological creatures.\nBlyton's first full-length adventure novel, \"The Secret Island\", was published in 1938, featuring the characters of Jack, Mike, Peggy and Nora. Described by \"The Glasgow Herald\" as a \"Robinson Crusoe-style adventure on an island in an English lake\", \"The Secret Island\" was a lifelong favourite of Gillian's and spawned the Secret series. The following year Blyton released her first book in the Circus series and her initial book in the Amelia Jane series, \"Naughty Amelia Jane!\" According to Gillian the main character was based on a large handmade doll given to her by her mother on her third birthday.\nDuring the 1940s Blyton became a prolific author, her success enhanced by her \"marketing, publicity and branding that was far ahead of its time\". In 1940 Blyton published two books\u00a0\u2013 \"Three Boys and a Circus\" and \"Children of Kidillin\"\u00a0\u2013 under the pseudonym of Mary Pollock (middle name plus first married name), in addition to the eleven published under her own name that year. So popular were Pollock's books that one reviewer was prompted to observe that \"Enid Blyton had better look to her laurels\". But Blyton's readers were not so easily deceived and many complained about the subterfuge to her and her publisher, with the result that all six books published under the name of Mary Pollock\u00a0\u2013 two in 1940 and four in 1943\u00a0\u2013 were reissued under Blyton's name. Later in 1940 Blyton published the first of her boarding school story books and the first novel in the Naughtiest Girl series, \"The Naughtiest Girl in the School\", which followed the exploits of the mischievous schoolgirl Elizabeth Allen at the fictional Whyteleafe School. The first of her six novels in the St. Clare's series, \"The Twins at St. Clare's\", appeared the following year, featuring the twin sisters Patricia and Isabel O'Sullivan.\nIn 1942 Blyton released the first book in the Mary Mouse series, \"Mary Mouse and the Dolls' House\", about a mouse exiled from her mousehole who becomes a maid at a dolls' house. Twenty-three books in the series were produced between 1942 and 1964; 10,000 copies were sold in 1942 alone. The same year, Blyton published the first novel in the Famous Five series, \"Five on a Treasure Island\", with illustrations by Eileen Soper. Its popularity resulted in twenty-one books between then and 1963, and the characters of Julian, Dick, Anne, George (Georgina) and Timmy the dog became household names in Britain. Matthew Grenby, author of \"Children's Literature\", states that the five were involved with \"unmasking hardened villains and solving serious crimes\", although the novels were \"hardly 'hard-boiled' thrillers\". Blyton based the character of Georgina, a tomboy she described as \"short-haired, freckled, sturdy, and snub-nosed\" and \"bold and daring, hot-tempered and loyal\", on herself.\nBlyton had an interest in biblical narratives, and retold Old and New Testament stories. \"The Land of Far-Beyond\" (1942) is a Christian parable along the lines of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" (1698), with contemporary children as the main characters. In 1943 she published \"The Children's Life of Christ\", a collection of fifty-nine short stories related to the life of Jesus, with her own slant on popular biblical stories, from the Nativity and the Three Wise Men through to the trial, the crucifixion and the resurrection. \"Tales from the Bible\" was published the following year, followed by \"The Boy with the Loaves and Fishes\" in 1948.\nThe first book in Blyton's Five Find-Outers series, \"The Mystery of the Burnt Cottage\", was published in 1943, as was the second book in the Faraway series, \"The Magic Faraway Tree\", which in 2003 was voted 66th in the BBC's Big Read poll to find the UK's favourite book. Several of Blyton's works during this period have seaside themes; \"John Jolly by the Sea\" (1943), a picture book intended for younger readers, was published in a booklet format by Evans Brothers. Other books with a maritime theme include \"The Secret of Cliff Castle\" and \"Smuggler Ben\", both attributed to Mary Pollock in 1943; \"The Island of Adventure\", the first in the Adventure series of eight novels from 1944 onwards; and various novels of the Famous Five series such as \"Five on a Treasure Island\" (1942), \"Five on Kirrin Island Again\" (1947) and \"Five Go Down to the Sea\" (1953).\nCapitalising on her success, with a loyal and ever-growing readership, Blyton produced a new edition of many of her series such as the Famous Five, the Five Find-Outers and St. Clare's every year in addition to many other novels, short stories and books. In 1946 Blyton launched the first in the Malory Towers series of six books based around the schoolgirl Darrell Rivers, \"First Term at Malory Towers\", which became extremely popular, particularly with girls.\nPeak output: 1949\u20131959.\nThe first book in Blyton's Barney Mysteries series, \"The Rockingdown Mystery\", was published in 1949, as was the first of her fifteen Secret Seven novels. The Secret Seven Society consists of Peter, his sister Janet, and their friends Colin, George, Jack, Pam and Barbara, who meet regularly in a shed in the garden to discuss peculiar events in their local community. Blyton rewrote the stories so they could be adapted into cartoons, which appeared in \"Mickey Mouse Weekly\" in 1951 with illustrations by George Brook. The French author Evelyne Lallemand continued the series in the 1970s, producing an additional twelve books, nine of which were translated into English by Anthea Bell between 1983 and 1987.\nBlyton's Noddy, about a little wooden boy from Toyland, first appeared in the \"Sunday Graphic\" on 5 June 1949, and in November that year \"Noddy Goes to Toyland\", the first of at least two dozen books in the series, was published. The idea was conceived by one of Blyton's publishers, Sampson, Low, Marston and Company, who in 1949 arranged a meeting between Blyton and the Dutch illustrator Harmsen van der Beek. Despite having to communicate via an interpreter, he provided some initial sketches of how Toyland and its characters would be represented. Four days after the meeting Blyton sent the text of the first two Noddy books to her publisher, to be forwarded to van der Beek. The Noddy books became one of her most successful and best-known series, and were hugely popular in the 1950s. An extensive range of sub-series, spin-offs and strip books were produced throughout the decade, including \"Noddy's Library\", \"Noddy's Garage of Books\", \"Noddy's Castle of Books\", \"Noddy's Toy Station of Books\" and \"Noddy's Shop of Books\".\nIn 1950 Blyton established the company Darrell Waters Ltd to manage her affairs. By the early 1950s she had reached the peak of her output, often publishing more than fifty books a year, and she remained extremely prolific throughout much of the decade. By 1955 Blyton had written her fourteenth Famous Five novel, \"Five Have Plenty of Fun\", her fifteenth Mary Mouse book, \"Mary Mouse in Nursery Rhyme Land\", her eighth book in the Adventure series, \"The River of Adventure\", and her seventh Secret Seven novel, \"Secret Seven Win Through\". She completed the sixth and final book of the Malory Towers series, \"Last Term at Malory Towers\", in 1951.\nBlyton published several further books featuring the character of Scamp the terrier, following on from \"The Adventures of Scamp\", a novel she had released in 1943 under the pseudonym of Mary Pollock. \"Scamp Goes on Holiday\" (1952) and \"Scamp and Bimbo\", \"Scamp at School\", \"Scamp and Caroline\" and \"Scamp Goes to the Zoo\" (1954) were illustrated by Pierre Probst. She introduced the character of Bom, a stylish toy drummer dressed in a bright red coat and helmet, alongside Noddy in \"TV Comic\" in July 1956. A book series began the same year with \"Bom the Little Toy Drummer\", featuring illustrations by R. Paul-Hoye, and followed with \"Bom and His Magic Drumstick\" (1957), \"Bom Goes Adventuring\" and \"Bom Goes to Ho Ho Village\" (1958), \"Bom and the Clown\" and \"Bom and the Rainbow\" (1959) and \"Bom Goes to Magic Town\" (1960). In 1958 she produced two annuals featuring the character, the first of which included twenty short stories, poems and picture strips.\nFinal works.\nMany of Blyton's series, including Noddy and The Famous Five, continued to be successful in the 1960s; by 1962, 26 million copies of Noddy had been sold. Blyton concluded several of her long-running series in 1963, publishing the last books of The Famous Five (\"Five Are Together Again\") and The Secret Seven (\"Fun for the Secret Seven\"); she also produced three more Brer Rabbit books with the illustrator Grace Lodge: \"Brer Rabbit Again\", \"Brer Rabbit Book\", and \"Brer Rabbit's a Rascal\". In 1962 many of her books were among the first to be published by Armada Books in paperback, making them more affordable to children.\nAfter 1963 Blyton's output was generally confined to short stories and books intended for very young readers, such as \"Learn to Count with Noddy\" and \"Learn to Tell Time with Noddy\" in 1965, and \"Stories for Bedtime\" and the Sunshine Picture Story Book collection in 1966. Her declining health and a falling off in readership among older children have been put forward as the principal reasons for this change in trend. Blyton published her last book in the Noddy series, \"Noddy and the Aeroplane\", in February 1964. In May the following year she published \"Mixed Bag\", a song book with music written by her nephew Carey, and in August she released her last full-length books, \"The Man Who Stopped to Help\" and \"The Boy Who Came Back\".\nMagazine and newspaper contributions.\nBlyton cemented her reputation as a children's writer when in 1926 she took over the editing of \"Sunny Stories\", a magazine that typically included the re-telling of legends, myths, stories and other articles for children. That same year she was given her own column in \"Teachers' World\", entitled \"From my Window\". Three years later she began contributing a weekly page in the magazine, in which she published letters from her fox terrier dog Bobs. They proved to be so popular that in 1933 they were published in book form as \"Letters from Bobs\", and sold ten thousand copies in the first week. Her most popular feature was \"Round the Year with Enid Blyton\", which consisted of forty-eight articles covering aspects of natural history such as weather, pond life, how to plant a school garden and how to make a bird table. Among Blyton's other nature projects was her monthly \"Country Letter\" feature that appeared in \"The Nature Lover\" magazine in 1935.\n\"Sunny Stories\" was renamed \"Enid Blyton's Sunny Stories\" in January 1937, and served as a vehicle for the serialisation of Blyton's books. Her first Naughty Amelia Jane story, about an anti-heroine based on a doll owned by her daughter Gillian, was published in the magazine. Blyton stopped contributing in 1952, and it closed down the following year, shortly before the appearance of the new fortnightly \"Enid Blyton Magazine\" written entirely by Blyton. The first edition appeared on 18 March 1953, and the magazine ran until September 1959.\nNoddy made his first appearance in the \"Sunday Graphic\" in 1949, the same year as Blyton's first daily Noddy strip for the London \"Evening Standard\". It was illustrated by van der Beek until his death in 1953.\nWriting style and technique.\nBlyton worked in a wide range of fictional genres, from fairy tales to animal, nature, detective, mystery, and circus stories, but she often \"blurred the boundaries\" in her books, and encompassed a range of genres even in her short stories. In a 1958 article published in \"The Author\", she wrote that there were a \"dozen or more different types of stories for children\", and she had tried them all, but her favourites were those with a family at their centre.\nIn a letter to the psychologist Peter McKellar, Blyton describes her writing technique:\nIn another letter to McKellar she describes how in just five days she wrote the 60,000-word book \"The River of Adventure\", the eighth in her Adventure Series, by listening to what she referred to as her \"under-mind\", which she contrasted with her \"upper conscious mind\". Blyton was unwilling to conduct any research or planning before beginning work on a new book, which coupled with the lack of variety in her life according to Druce almost inevitably presented the danger that she might unconsciously, and clearly did, plagiarise the books she had read, including her own. Gillian has recalled that her mother \"never knew where her stories came from\", but that she used to talk about them \"coming from her 'mind's eye\", as did William Wordsworth and Charles Dickens. Blyton had \"thought it was made up of every experience she'd ever had, everything she's seen or heard or read, much of which had long disappeared from her conscious memory\" but never knew the direction her stories would take. Blyton further explained in her biography that \"If I tried to think out or invent the whole book, I could not do it. For one thing, it would bore me and for another, it would lack the 'verve' and the extraordinary touches and surprising ideas that flood out from my imagination.\"\nBlyton's daily routine varied little over the years. She usually began writing soon after breakfast, with her portable typewriter on her knee and her favourite red Moroccan shawl nearby; she believed that the colour red acted as a \"mental stimulus\" for her. Stopping only for a short lunch break she continued writing until five o'clock, by which time she would usually have produced 6,000\u201310,000 words.\nA 2000 article in \"The Malay Mail\" considers Blyton's children to have \"lived in a world shaped by the realities of post-war austerity\", enjoying freedom without the political correctness of today, which serves modern readers of Blyton's novels with a form of escapism. Brandon Robshaw of \"The Independent\" refers to the Blyton universe as \"crammed with colour and character\", \"self-contained and internally consistent\", noting that Blyton exemplifies a strong mistrust of adults and figures of authority in her works, creating a world in which children govern. Gillian noted that in her mother's adventure, detective and school stories for older children, \"the hook is the strong storyline with plenty of cliffhangers, a trick she acquired from her years of writing serialised stories for children's magazines. There is always a strong moral framework in which bravery and loyalty are (eventually) rewarded\". Blyton herself wrote that \"my love of children is the whole foundation of all my work\".\nVictor Watson, Assistant Director of Research at Homerton College, Cambridge, believes that Blyton's works reveal an \"essential longing and potential associated with childhood\", and notes how the opening pages of \"The Mountain of Adventure\" present a \"deeply appealing ideal of childhood\". He argues that Blyton's work differs from that of many other authors in its approach, describing the narrative of The Famous Five series for instance as \"like a powerful spotlight, it seeks to illuminate, to explain, to demystify. It takes its readers on a roller-coaster story in which the darkness is always banished; everything puzzling, arbitrary, evocative is either dismissed or explained\". Watson further notes how Blyton often used minimalist visual descriptions and introduced a few careless phrases such as \"gleamed enchantingly\" to appeal to her young readers.\nFrom the mid-1950s rumours began to circulate that Blyton had not written all the books attributed to her, a charge she found particularly distressing. She published an appeal in her magazine asking children to let her know if they heard such stories and, after one mother informed her that she had attended a parents' meeting at her daughter's school during which a young librarian had repeated the allegation, Blyton decided in 1955 to begin legal proceedings. The librarian was eventually forced to make a public apology in open court early the following year, but the rumours that Blyton operated \"a 'company' of ghost writers\" persisted, as some found it difficult to believe that one woman working alone could produce such a volume of work.\nEnid's Conservative personal politics were often in view in her fiction. In \"The Mystery of the Missing Necklace\" (a The Five Find-Outers installment), she uses the character of young Elizabeth (\"Bets\") to give a statement praising Winston Churchill and describing the politician as a \"statesman\".\nCharitable work.\nBlyton felt a responsibility to provide her readers with a positive moral framework, and she encouraged them to support worthy causes. Her view, expressed in a 1957 article, was that children should help animals and other children rather than adults:\nBlyton and the members of the children's clubs she promoted via her magazines raised a great deal of money for various charities; according to Blyton, membership of her clubs meant \"working for others, for no reward\". The largest of the clubs she was involved with was the Busy Bees, the junior section of the People's Dispensary for Sick Animals, which Blyton had actively supported since 1933. The club had been set up by Maria Dickin in 1934, and after Blyton publicised its existence in the \"Enid Blyton Magazine\" it attracted 100,000 members in three years. Such was Blyton's popularity among children that after she became Queen Bee in 1952 more than 20,000 additional members were recruited in her first year in office. The Enid Blyton Magazine Club was formed in 1953. Its primary objective was to raise funds to help those children with cerebral palsy who attended a centre in Cheyne Walk, in Chelsea, London, by furnishing an on-site hostel among other things.\nThe Famous Five series gathered such a following that readers asked Blyton if they might form a fan club. She agreed, on condition that it serve a useful purpose, and suggested that it could raise funds for the Shaftesbury Society Babies' Home in Beaconsfield, on whose committee she had served since 1948. The club was established in 1952, and provided funds for equipping a Famous Five Ward at the home, a paddling pool, sun room, summer house, playground, birthday and Christmas celebrations, and visits to the pantomime. By the late 1950s Blyton's clubs had a membership of 500,000, and raised \u00a335,000 in the six years of the \"Enid Blyton Magazine\"'s run.\nBy 1974 the Famous Five Club had a membership of 220,000, and was growing at the rate of 6,000 new members a year. The Beaconsfield home it was set up to support closed in 1967, but the club continued to raise funds for other paediatric charities, including an Enid Blyton bed at Great Ormond Street Hospital and a mini-bus for disabled children at Stoke Mandeville Hospital.\nJigsaw puzzle and games.\nBlyton capitalised upon her commercial success as an author by negotiating agreements with jigsaw puzzle and games manufacturers from the late 1940s onwards; by the early 1960s some 146 different companies were involved in merchandising Noddy alone. In 1948 Bestime released four jigsaw puzzles featuring her characters, and the first Enid Blyton board game appeared, \"Journey Through Fairyland\", created by BGL. The first card game, Faraway Tree, appeared from Pepys in 1950. In 1954 Bestime released the first four jigsaw puzzles of the Secret Seven, and the following year a Secret Seven card game appeared.\nBestime released the Little Noddy Car Game in 1953 and the Little Noddy Leap Frog Game in 1955, and in 1956 American manufacturer Parker Brothers released Little Noddy's Taxi Game, a board game which features Noddy driving about town, picking up various characters. Bestime released its Plywood Noddy Jigsaws series in 1957 and a Noddy jigsaw series featuring cards appeared from 1963, with illustrations by Robert Lee. Arrow Games became the chief producer of Noddy jigsaws in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Whitman manufactured four new Secret Seven jigsaw puzzles in 1975, and produced four new Malory Towers ones two years later. In 1979 the company released a Famous Five adventure board game, Famous Five Kirrin Island Treasure. Stephen Thraves wrote eight Famous Five adventure game books, published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton in the 1980s. The first adventure game book of the series, \"The Wreckers' Tower Game\", was published in October 1984.\nPersonal life.\nOn 28 August 1924 Blyton married Major Hugh Alexander Pollock, DSO (1888\u20131971) at Bromley Register Office, without inviting her family. They married shortly after he divorced from his first wife, with whom he had two sons, one of whom was already deceased. Pollock was editor of the book department in the publishing firm of George Newnes, which became her regular publisher. It was he who requested that Blyton write a book about animals, \"The Zoo Book\", which was completed in the month before they married. They initially lived in a flat in Chelsea before moving to Elfin Cottage in Beckenham in 1926, and then to Old Thatch in Bourne End (called Peterswood in her books) in 1929. Blyton's first daughter Gillian, was born on 15 July 1931, and after a miscarriage in 1934, she gave birth to a second daughter, Imogen, on 27 October 1935.\nIn 1938 Blyton and her family moved to a house in Beaconsfield, which was named Green Hedges by Blyton's readers following a competition in her magazine. By the mid-1930s, Pollock\u00a0\u2013 possibly due to the trauma he had suffered during the First World War being revived through his meetings as a publisher with Winston Churchill\u00a0\u2013 withdrew increasingly from public life and became a secret alcoholic. With the outbreak of the Second World War, he became involved in the Home Guard. Pollock met again Ida Crowe, an aspiring writer nineteen years his junior, whom he had met years before. He made an offer to her to join him as secretary in his posting to a Home Guard training centre at Denbies, a Gothic mansion in Surrey belonging to Lord Ashcombe, and they entered into a romantic relationship. Blyton's marriage to Pollock became troubled for years, and according to Crowe's memoir, Blyton began a series of affairs, including a lesbian relationship with one of the children's nannies. In 1941 Blyton met Kenneth Fraser Darrell Waters, a London surgeon with whom she began a serious affair. Pollock discovered the liaison, and threatened to initiate divorce proceedings against Blyton. Fearing that exposure of her adultery would ruin her public image, it was ultimately agreed that Blyton would instead file for divorce against Pollock. According to Crowe's memoir, Blyton promised that if he admitted to infidelity she would allow him parental access to their daughters; but after the divorce he was forbidden to contact them, and Blyton ensured he was subsequently unable to find work in publishing. Pollock, having married Crowe on 26 October 1943, eventually resumed his heavy drinking and was forced to petition for bankruptcy in 1950.\nBlyton and Darrell Waters married at the City of Westminster Register Office on 20 October 1943. She changed the surname of her daughters to Darrell Waters and publicly embraced her new role as a happily married and devoted doctor's wife. After discovering she was pregnant in the spring of 1945, Blyton miscarried five months later, following a fall from a ladder. The baby would have been Darrell Waters's first child and it would also have been the son for which both of them longed.\nHer love of tennis included playing naked, with nude tennis \"a common practice in those days among the more louche members of the middle classes\".\nBlyton's health began to deteriorate in 1957, when during a round of golf she started to complain of feeling faint and breathless, and by 1960 she was displaying signs of dementia. Her agent George Greenfield recalled that it was \"unthinkable\" for the \"most famous and successful of children's authors with her enormous energy and computer-like memory\" to be losing her mind and suffering from what is now known as Alzheimer's disease in her mid-sixties. Blyton's situation was worsened by her husband's declining health throughout the 1960s; he suffered from severe arthritis in his neck and hips, deafness, and became increasingly ill-tempered and erratic until his death on 15 September 1967.\nThe story of Blyton's life was dramatised in a BBC film entitled \"Enid\", which aired in the United Kingdom on BBC Four on 16 November 2009. Helena Bonham Carter, who played the title role, described Blyton as \"a complete workaholic, an achievement junkie and an extremely canny businesswoman\" who \"knew how to brand herself, right down to the famous signature\".\nDeath and legacy.\nDuring the months following her husband's death, Blyton became increasingly ill and moved into a nursing home three months before her death. She died at the Greenways Nursing Home, Hampstead, North London, on 28 November 1968, aged 71. A memorial service was held at St James's Church, Piccadilly and she was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, where her ashes remain. Blyton's home, Green Hedges, was auctioned on 26 May 1971 and demolished in 1973; the site is now occupied by houses and a street named Blyton Close. An English Heritage blue plaque commemorates Blyton at Hook Road in Chessington, where she lived from 1920 to 1924. In 2014, a plaque recording her time as a Beaconsfield resident from 1938 until her death in 1968 was unveiled in the town hall gardens, next to small iron figures of Noddy and Big Ears.\nSince her death and the publication of her daughter Imogen's 1989 autobiography, \"A Childhood at Green Hedges\", Blyton has emerged as an emotionally immature, unstable and often malicious figure. Imogen considered her mother to be \"arrogant, insecure, pretentious, very skilled at putting difficult or unpleasant things out of her mind, and without a trace of maternal instinct. As a child, I viewed her as a rather strict authority. As an adult I pitied her.\" Blyton's eldest daughter Gillian remembered her rather differently however, as \"a fair and loving mother, and a fascinating companion\".\nThe Enid Blyton Trust for Children was established in 1982, with Imogen as its first chairman, and in 1985 it established the National Library for the Handicapped Child. \"Enid Blyton's Adventure Magazine\" began publication in September 1985 and, on 14 October 1992, the BBC began publishing \"Noddy Magazine\" and released the Noddy CD-Rom in October 1996.\nThe first Enid Blyton Day was held at Rickmansworth on 6 March 1993 and, in October 1996, the Enid Blyton award, The Enid, was given to those who have made outstanding contributions towards children. The Enid Blyton Society was formed in early 1995, to provide \"a focal point for collectors and enthusiasts of Enid Blyton\" through its thrice-annual \"Enid Blyton Society Journal\", its annual Enid Blyton Day and its website. On 16 December 1996, Channel 4 broadcast a documentary about Blyton, \"Secret Lives\". To celebrate her centenary in 1997, exhibitions were put on at the London Toy &amp; Model Museum (now closed), Hereford and Worcester County Museum and Bromley Library and, on 9 September, the Royal Mail issued centenary stamps.\nThe London-based entertainment and retail company Trocadero plc purchased Blyton's Darrell Waters Ltd in 1995 for \u00a314.6\u00a0million and established a subsidiary, Enid Blyton Ltd, to handle all intellectual properties, character brands and media in Blyton's works. The group changed its name to Chorion in 1998 but, after financial difficulties in 2012, sold its assets. Hachette UK acquired from Chorion world rights in the Blyton estate in March 2013, including The Famous Five series but excluding the rights to Noddy, which had been sold to DreamWorks Classics (formerly Classic Media, now a subsidiary of DreamWorks Animation) in 2012.\nBlyton's granddaughter, Sophie Smallwood, wrote a new Noddy book to celebrate the character's 60th birthday, 46 years after the last book was published; \"Noddy and the Farmyard Muddle\" (2009) was illustrated by Robert Tyndall. In February 2011, the manuscript of a previously unknown Blyton novel, \"Mr Tumpy's Caravan\", was discovered by the archivist at Seven Stories, National Centre for Children's Books in a collection of papers belonging to Blyton's daughter Gillian, purchased by Seven Stories in 2010 following her death. It was initially thought to belong to a comic strip collection of the same name published in 1949, but it appears to be unrelated and is believed to be something written in the 1930s, which had been rejected by a publisher.\nIn a 1982 survey of 10,000 eleven-year-old children, Blyton was voted their most popular writer. She is the world's fourth most-translated author, behind Agatha Christie, Jules Verne and William Shakespeare with her books being translated into 90 languages. From 2000 to 2010, Blyton was listed as a Top Ten author, selling almost 8 million copies (worth \u00a331.2\u00a0million) in the UK alone. In 2003, \"The Magic Faraway Tree\" was voted 66th in the BBC's Big Read. In the 2008 Costa Book Awards, Blyton was voted Britain's best-loved author. Her books continue to be very popular among children in Commonwealth nations such as India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malta, New Zealand and Australia, and around the world. They have also seen a surge of popularity in China, where they are \"big with every generation\". In March 2004, Chorion and the Chinese publisher Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press negotiated an agreement over the Noddy franchise, which included bringing the character to an animated series on television, with a potential audience of a further 95 million children under the age of five. Chorion spent around \u00a310\u00a0million digitising Noddy and, as of 2002, had made television agreements with at least 11 countries worldwide.\nNovelists influenced by Blyton include the crime writer Denise Danks, whose fictional detective Georgina Powers is based on George from the Famous Five. Peter Hunt's \"A Step off the Path\" (1985) is also influenced by the Famous Five, and the St. Clare's and Malory Towers series provided the inspiration for Jacqueline Wilson's \"Double Act\" (1996) and Ad\u00e8le Geras's Egerton Hall trilogy (1990\u201392) respectively.\nCritical backlash.\nA.H. Thompson, who compiled an extensive overview of censorship efforts in the United Kingdom's public libraries, dedicated an entire chapter to \"The Enid Blyton Affair\", and wrote of her in 1975: \nBlyton's range of plots and settings has been described as limited, repetitive and continually recycled. Many of her books were critically assessed by teachers and librarians, deemed unfit for children to read, and removed from syllabuses and public libraries. Responding to claims that her moral views were \"dependably predictable\", Blyton commented that \"most of you could write down perfectly correctly all the things that I believe in and stand for\u00a0\u2013 you have found them in my books, and a writer's books are always a faithful reflection of himself\".\nFrom the 1930s to the 1950s the BBC operated a \"de facto\" ban on dramatising Blyton's books for radio, considering her to be a \"second-rater\" whose work was without literary merit. The children's literary critic Margery Fisher likened Blyton's books to \"slow poison\", and Jean E. Sutcliffe of the BBC's schools broadcast department wrote of Blyton's ability to churn out \"mediocre material\", noting that \"her capacity to do so amounts to genius\u00a0... anyone else would have died of boredom long ago\". Michael Rosen, Children's Laureate from 2007 until 2009, wrote that \"I find myself flinching at occasional bursts of snobbery and the assumed level of privilege of the children and families in the books.\" The children's author Anne Fine presented an overview of the concerns about Blyton's work and responses to them on BBC Radio 4 in November 2008, in which she noted the \"drip, drip, drip of disapproval\" associated with the books. Blyton's response to her critics was that she was uninterested in the views of anyone over the age of 12, stating that half the attacks on her work were motivated by jealousy and the rest came from \"stupid people who don't know what they're talking about because they've never read any of my books\".\nDespite criticism by contemporaries that her work's quality began to suffer in the 1950s at the expense of its increasing volume, Blyton nevertheless capitalised on being generally regarded at the time as \"a more 'savoury', English alternative\" to what some considered an \"invasion\" of Britain by American culture, in the form of \"rock music, horror comics, television, teenage culture, delinquency, and Disney\".\nAccording to British academic Nicholas Tucker, the works of Enid Blyton have been \"banned from more public libraries over the years than is the case with any other adult or children's author\", though such attempts to quell the popularity of her books over the years seem to have been largely unsuccessful, and \"she still remains very widely read\".\nSimplicity.\nSome librarians felt that Blyton's restricted use of language, a conscious product of her teaching background, was prejudicial to an appreciation of more literary qualities. In a scathing article published in \"Encounter\" in 1958, the journalist Colin Welch remarked that it was \"hard to see how a diet of Miss Blyton could help with the 11-plus or even with the Cambridge English Tripos\", but reserved his harshest criticism for Blyton's Noddy, describing him as an \"unnaturally priggish\u00a0... sanctimonious\u00a0... witless, spiritless, snivelling, sneaking doll.\"\nThe author and educational psychologist Nicholas Tucker notes that it was common to see Blyton cited as people's favourite or least favourite author according to their age, and argues that her books create an \"encapsulated world for young readers that simply dissolves with age, leaving behind only memories of excitement and strong identification\". Fred Inglis considers Blyton's books to be technically easy to read, but to also be \"emotionally and cognitively easy\". He mentions that the psychologist Michael Woods believed that Blyton was different from many other older authors writing for children in that she seemed untroubled by presenting them with a world that differed from reality. Woods surmised that Blyton \"was a child, she thought as a child, and wrote as a child\u00a0... the basic feeling is essentially pre-adolescent\u00a0... Enid Blyton has no moral dilemmas\u00a0... Inevitably Enid Blyton was labelled by rumour a child-hater. If true, such a fact should come as no surprise to us, for as a child herself all other children can be nothing but rivals for her.\" Inglis argues though that Blyton was clearly devoted to children and put an enormous amount of energy into her work, with a powerful belief in \"representing the crude moral diagrams and garish fantasies of a readership\". Blyton's daughter Imogen has stated that she \"loved a relationship with children through her books\", but real children were an intrusion, and there was no room for intruders in the world that Blyton occupied through her writing.\nAccusations of racism, xenophobia and sexism.\nAccusations of racism in Blyton's books were first made by Lena Jeger in a \"Guardian\" article published in 1966. In the context of discussing possible moves to restrict publications inciting racial hatred, Jeger was critical of Blyton's \"The Little Black Doll\", published a few months earlier. Sambo, the black doll of the title, is hated by his owner and other toys owing to his \"ugly black face\", and runs away. A shower of \"magic rain\" washes his face clean, after which he is welcomed back home with his now pink face. Jamaica Kincaid also considers the Noddy books to be \"deeply racist\" because of the blonde children and the black golliwogs. In Blyton's 1944 novel \"The Island of Adventure\", a black servant named Jo-Jo is very intelligent, but is particularly cruel to the children.\nAccusations of xenophobia were also made. As George Greenfield observed, \"Enid was very much part of that between the wars middle class which believed that foreigners were untrustworthy or funny or sometimes both\". The publisher Macmillan conducted an internal assessment of Blyton's \"The Mystery That Never Was\", submitted to them at the height of her fame in 1960. The review was carried out by the author and books editor Phyllis Hartnoll, in whose view \"There is a faint but unattractive touch of old-fashioned xenophobia in the author's attitude to the thieves; they are 'foreign'\u00a0... and this seems to be regarded as sufficient to explain their criminality.\" Macmillan rejected the manuscript, but it was published by William Collins in 1961, and then again in 1965 and 1983.\nBlyton's depictions of boys and girls are considered by many critics to be sexist. In a \"Guardian\" article published in 2005 Lucy Mangan proposed that The Famous Five series depicts a power struggle between Julian, Dick and George (Georgina), in which the female characters either act like boys or are talked down to, as when Dick lectures George: \"it's really time you gave up thinking you're as good as a boy\".\nIn December 2016 the Royal Mint discussed featuring Blyton on a commemorative 50p coin but dismissed the idea because she was \"known to have been a racist, sexist, homophobe and not a very well-regarded writer\".\nRevisions to later editions.\nTo address criticisms levelled at Blyton's work some later editions have been altered to reflect more politically progressive attitudes towards issues such as race, gender, violence between young persons, the treatment of children by adults, and legal changes in Britain as to what is allowable for young children to do in the years since the stories were originally written (e.g. purchasing fireworks); modern reprints of the Noddy series substitute teddy bears or goblins for golliwogs, for instance. The golliwogs who steal Noddy's car and dump him naked in the Dark Wood in \"Here Comes Noddy Again\" are replaced by goblins in the 1986 revision, who strip Noddy only of his shoes and hat and return at the end of the story to apologise.\n\"The Faraway Tree\"'s Dame Slap, who made regular use of corporal punishment, was changed to Dame Snap who no longer did so, and the names of Dick and Fanny in the same series were changed to Rick and Frannie. Characters in the Malory Towers and St. Clare's series are no longer spanked or threatened with a spanking, but are instead scolded. References to George's short hair making her look like a boy were removed in revisions to \"Five on a Hike Together\", reflecting the idea that girls need not have long hair to be considered feminine or normal. Anne of \"The Famous Five\" stating that boys cannot wear pretty dresses or like girl's dolls was removed. In \"The Adventurous Four\", the names of the young twin girls were changed from Jill and Mary to Pippa and Zoe.\nIn 2010 Hodder, the publisher of the Famous Five series, announced its intention to update the language used in the books, of which it sold more than half a million copies a year. The changes, which Hodder described as \"subtle\", mainly affect the dialogue rather than the narrative. For instance, \"school tunic\" becomes \"uniform\", \"mother and father\", and \"mother and daddy\" (this latter one used by young female characters and deemed sexist) becomes \"mum and dad\", \"bathing\" is replaced by \"swimming\", and \"jersey\" by \"jumper\". Some commentators see the changes as necessary to encourage modern readers, whereas others regard them as unnecessary and patronising. In 2016 Hodder's parent company Hachette announced that they would abandon the revisions as, based on feedback, they had not been a success.\nStage, film and television adaptations.\nIn 1954 Blyton adapted Noddy for the stage, producing the \"Noddy in Toyland\" pantomime in just two or three weeks. The production was staged at the 2660-seat Stoll Theatre in Kingsway, London at Christmas. Its popularity resulted in the show running during the Christmas season for five or six years. Blyton was delighted with its reception by children in the audience, and attended the theatre three or four times a week. TV adaptations of Noddy since 1954 include one in the 1970s narrated by Richard Briers. In 1955 a stage play based on the Famous Five was produced, and in January 1997 the King's Head Theatre embarked on a six-month tour of the UK with \"The Famous Five Musical\", to commemorate Blyton's centenary. On 21 November 1998 \"The Secret Seven Save the World\" was first performed at the Sherman Theatre in Cardiff.\nThere have also been several film and television adaptations of the Famous Five: by the Children's Film Foundation in 1957 and 1964, Southern Television in 1978\u201379, and Zenith Productions in 1995\u201397. The series was also adapted for the German film \"F\u00fcnf Freunde\", directed by Mike Marzuk and released in 2011.\nThe Comic Strip, a group of British comedians, produced two extreme parodies of the Famous Five for Channel 4 television: \"Five Go Mad in Dorset\", broadcast in 1982, and \"Five Go Mad on Mescalin\", broadcast the following year. A third in the series, \"Five Go to Rehab\", was broadcast on Sky in 2012.\nBlyton's \"The Faraway Tree\" series of books has also been adapted to television and film. On 29 September 1997 the BBC began broadcasting an animated series called \"The Enchanted Lands\", based on the series. It was announced in October 2014 that a deal had been signed with publishers Hachette for \"The Faraway Tree\" series to be adapted into a live-action film by director Sam Mendes\u2019 production company. Marlene Johnson, head of children's books at Hachette, said: \"Enid Blyton was a passionate advocate of children\u2019s storytelling, and The Magic Faraway Tree is a fantastic example of her creative imagination.\"\nBlyton's \"Malory Towers\" has been adapted into a musical of the same name by Emma Rice's theatre company. It was scheduled to do a UK spring tour in 2020 which has been postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2019, \"Malory Towers\" was adapted as a 13 part TV series for the BBC. It is made partly in Toronto and partly in the UK in association with Canada's Family Channel. The series went to air in the UK from April 2020.\nPapers.\nSeven Stories, the National Centre for Children's Books in Newcastle upon Tyne, holds the largest public collection of Blyton's papers and typescripts. The Seven Stories collection contains a significant number of Blyton's typescripts, including the previously unpublished novel, \"Mr Tumpy's Caravan\", as well as personal papers and diaries. The purchase of the material in 2010 was made possible by special funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund, the MLA/V&amp;A Purchase Grant Fund, and two private donations."}
{"id": "10259", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10259", "title": "Epipalaeolithic Near East", "text": "The Epipalaeolithic Near East designates the Epipalaeolithic (\"Final Old Stone Age\", also known as Mesolithic) in the prehistory of the Near East. It is the period after the Upper Palaeolithic and before the Neolithic, between approximately 20,000 and 10,000 years Before Present (BP). The people of the Epipalaeolithic were nomadic hunter-gatherers who generally lived in small, seasonal camps rather than permanent villages. They made sophisticated stone tools using microliths\u2014small, finely-produced blades that were hafted in wooden implements. These are the primary artifacts by which archaeologists recognise and classify Epipalaeolithic sites.\nThe start of the Epipalaeolithic is defined by the appearance of microliths. Although this is an arbitrary boundary, the Epipalaeolithic does differ significantly from the preceding Upper Palaeolithic. Epipalaeolithic sites are more numerous, better preserved, and can be accurately radiocarbon dated. The period coincides with the gradual retreat of glacial climatic conditions between the Last Glacial Maximum and the start of the Holocene, and it is characterised by population growth and economic intensification. The Epipalaeolithic ended with the \"Neolithic Revolution\" and the onset of domestication, food production, and sedentism, although archaeologists now recognise that these trends began in the Epipalaeolithic.\nThe period may be subdivided into Early, Middle and Late Epipalaeolithic: The Early Epipalaeolithic corresponds to the Kebaran culture, c. 20,000 to 14,500 years ago, the Middle Epipalaeolithic is the Geometric Kebaran or late phase of the Kebaran, and the Late Epipalaeolithic to the Natufian, 14,500\u201311,500 BP. The Natufian overlaps with the incipient Neolithic Revolution, the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A.\nLevant.\nEarly Epipalaeolithic.\nThe Early Epipalaeolithic, also known as Kebaran, lasted from 20,000 to 12,150\u00a0BP. It followed the Upper Paleolithic Levantine Aurignacian (formerly called Antelian) period throughout the Levant. By the end of the Levantine Aurignacian, gradual changes took place in stone industries. Small stone tools called microliths and retouched bladelets can be found for the first time. The microliths of this culture period differ markedly from the Aurignacian artifacts.\nBy 18,000\u00a0BP the climate and environment had changed, starting a period of transition. The Levant became more arid and the forest vegetation retreated, to be replaced by steppe. The cool and dry period ended at the beginning of Mesolithic 1. The hunter-gatherers of the Aurignacian would have had to modify their way of living and their pattern of settlement to adapt to the changing conditions. The crystallization of these new patterns resulted in Mesolithic 1. The people developed new types of settlements and new stone industries.\nThe inhabitants of a small Mesolithic 1 site in the Levant left little more than their chipped stone tools behind. The industry was of small tools made of bladelets struck off single-platform cores. Besides bladelets, burins and end-scrapers have been found. A few bone tools and some ground stone have also been found. These so-called Mesolithic sites of Asia are far less numerous than those of the Neolithic, and the archeological remains are very poor.\nThe type site is Kebara Cave south of Haifa. The Kebaran was characterized by small, geometric microliths. The people were thought to lack the specialized grinders and pounders found in later Near Eastern cultures.\nThe Kebaran is preceded by the Athlitian phase of the Levantine Aurignacian (formerly called Antelian) and followed by the proto-agrarian Natufian culture of the Epipalaeolithic. The appearance of the Kebarian culture, of microlithic type, implies a significant rupture in the cultural continuity of Levantine Upper Paleolithic. The Kebaran culture, with its use of microliths, is associated also with the use of the bow and arrow and the domestication of the dog. The Kebaran is also characterised by the earliest collecting and processing of wild cereals, known due to the excavation of grain-grinding tools. This was the first step towards the Neolithic Revolution. The Kebaran people are believed to have migrated seasonally, dispersing to upland environments in the summer, and gathering in caves and rockshelters near lowland lakes in the winter. This diversity of environments may be the reason for the variety of tools found in their toolkits.\nThe Kebaran is generally thought to have been ancestral to the later Natufian culture that occupied much of the same range.\nHarvesting of cereals.\nThe earliest evidence for the use of composite cereal harvesting tools are the glossed flint blades that have been found at the site of Ohalo II, a 23,000-year-old fisher-hunter-gatherers\u2019 camp on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, Northern Israel. The Ohalo site is dated at the junction of the Upper Paleolithic and the Early Epipalaeolithic, and has been attributed to both periods. The wear traces on the tools indicate that these were used for harvesting near-ripe, semi-green wild cereals, shortly before grains ripen enough to disperse naturally. The study shows that the tools were not used intensively, and they reflect two harvesting modes: flint knives held by hand and inserts hafted into a handle. The finds reveal the existence of cereal harvesting techniques and tools some 8,000 years before the Natufian, and 12,000 years before the establishment of sedentary farming communities in the Near East during the Neolithic Revolution. Furthermore, the new finds accord well with evidence for the earliest ever cereal cultivation at the site, and for the use of stone-made grinding implements.\nArtistic expression in the Kebaran culture.\nEvidence for symbolic behavior of Late Pleistocene foragers in the Levant has been found in engraved limestone plaquettes from the Epipalaeolithic open-air site Ein Qashish South in the Jezreel Valley, Israel. The engravings were uncovered in Kebaran and Geometric Kebaran deposits (ca. 23,000 and ca. 16,500 BP), and include the image of a bird, the first figurative representation known so far from a pre-Natufian Epipalaeolithic site, together with geometric motifs such as chevrons, cross-hatchings, and ladders. Some of the engravings closely resemble roughly contemporary European finds, and may be interpreted as \"systems of notations\" or \"artificial memory systems\" related to the timing of seasonal resources and related important events for nomadic groups.\nSimilar-looking signs and patterns are well known from the context of the local Natufian, a final Epipalaeolithic period when sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers started practicing agriculture.\nLate Epipalaeolithic.\nThe Late Epipalaeolithic is also called the Natufian culture. This period is characterized by the early rise of agriculture, which later emerged more fully in the Neolithic period. Radiocarbon dating places the Natufian culture between 12,500 and 9500\u00a0BCE, just before the end of the Pleistocene. This period is characterised by the beginning of agriculture. The earliest-known battle occurred during the Mesolithic period at a site in Sudan, known as Cemetery 117.\nThe Natufian culture is commonly split into two subperiods: Early Natufian (12,500\u201310,800\u00a0BCE) (Christopher Delage gives 13,000\u201311,500 BP uncalibrated, equivalent to 13,700\u201311,500\u00a0BCE) and Late Natufian (10,800\u20139500\u00a0BCE). The Late Natufian most likely occurred in tandem with the Younger Dryas. The following period is often called the Pre-Pottery Neolithic; specialists do not discuss \"Mesolithic pottery\" in terms of the Levant.\nOther regions.\nArabia.\nUntil recently, it was thought that the Arabian peninsula was too arid and inhospitable for human settlement in the Late Pleistocene. The earliest known sites belonged to the early Neolithic, c. 9000 to 8000 BP, and it was supposed that people were able to recolonise the region then due to the wetter climate of the early Holocene.\nHowever, in 2014, archaeologists working in the southern Nefud desert discovered an Epipalaeolithic site dating to between 12,000 and 10,000 BP. The site is located in the Jubbah basin, a palaeolake which retained water in the otherwise dry conditions of the Terminal Pleistocene. The stone tools found bore a close resemblance to the Geometric Kebaran, a Levantine industry associated with the Middle Epipalaeolithic. The excavators of the site therefore proposed that northern Arabia was colonised by foragers from the Levant around 15,000 years ago. These groups may then have been cut off by the drying climate and retreated to \"refugia\" like the Jubbah palaeolake.\nFood sources.\nThe Epipalaeolithic is best understood when discussing the southern Levant, as the period is well documented due to good preservation at the sites, at least of animal remains. The most prevalent animal food sources in the Levant during this period were: deer, gazelle, and ibex of various species, and smaller animals including birds, lizard, fox, tortoise, and hare. Less common were aurochs, wild equids, wild boar, wild cattle, and hartebeest. At Neve David near Haifa, 15 mammal species were found, and two reptile species. Despite then being very close to the coast, the rather small number of seashells found (7 genera) and the piercing of many, suggests these may have been collected as ornaments rather than food.\nHowever the period seems to be marked by an increase in plant foods and a decrease in meat eating. Over 40 plant species have been found by analysing one site in the Jordan Valley, and some grains were processed and baked. Stones with evidence of grinding have been found. These were most likely the main food sources throughout the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A, which introduced the widespread agricultural growing of crops. "}
{"id": "10263", "revid": "40537837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10263", "title": "Executive (government)", "text": "The executive is the branch of government exercising authority in and holding responsibility for the governance of a state. The executive executes and enforces law.\nIn political systems based on the principle of separation of powers, authority is distributed among several branches (executive, legislative, judicial)\u2014an attempt to prevent the concentration of power in the hands of a single group of people. In such a system, the executive does not pass laws (the role of the legislature) or interpret them (the role of the judiciary). Instead, the executive enforces the law as written by the legislature and interpreted by the judiciary. The executive can be the source of certain types of law, such as a decree or executive order. Executive bureaucracies are commonly the source of regulations.\nMinisters.\nIn parliamentary systems, the executive is responsible to the elected legislature, i.e. must maintain the confidence of the legislature (or one part of it, if bicameral). The legislature can, in certain circumstances (varying by state), express its lack of confidence in the executive, which causes either a change in governing party or group of parties or a general election. Parliamentary systems have a head of government (who leads the executive, often called ministers) normally distinct from the head of state (who continues through governmental and electoral changes). In the Westminster type of parliamentary system, the principle of separation of powers is not as entrenched as in some others. Members of the executive (ministers), are also members of the legislature, and hence play an important part in both the writing and enforcing of law.\nIn this context, the executive consists of a leader(s) of an office or multiple offices. Specifically, the top leadership roles of the executive branch may include:\nPresidents and ministers.\nIn a presidential system, the leader of the executive is both the \"head of state\" and \"head of government\". \nIn a parliamentary system, a cabinet minister responsible to the legislature is the head of government, while the head of state is usually a largely ceremonial monarch or president."}
