{"id": "7843", "revid": "25994772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7843", "title": "Planned economy", "text": "A planned economy is a type of economic system where investment, production and the allocation of capital goods takes place according to economy-wide economic plans and production plans. A planned economy may use centralized, decentralized, participatory or Soviet-type forms of economic planning. The level of centralization or decentralization in decision-making and participation depends on the specific type of planning mechanism employed.\nSocialist states based on the Soviet model have used central planning, although a minority such as the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have adopted some degree of market socialism. Market abolitionist socialism replaces factor markets with direct calculation as the means to coordinate the activities of the various socially-owned economic enterprises that make up the economy. More recent approaches to socialist planning and allocation have come from some economists and computer scientists proposing planning mechanisms based on advances in computer science and information technology.\nPlanned economies contrast with unplanned economies, specifically market economies, where autonomous firms operating in markets make decisions about production, distribution, pricing and investment. Market economies that use indicative planning are variously referred to as planned market economies, mixed economies and mixed market economies. A command economy follows an administrative-command system and uses Soviet-type economic planning which was characteristic of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc before most of these countries converted to market economies. This highlights the central role of hierarchical administration and public ownership of production in guiding the allocation of resources in these economic systems.\nOverview.\nIn the Hellenistic and post-Hellenistic world, \"compulsory state planning was the most characteristic trade condition for the Egyptian countryside, for Hellenistic India, and to a lesser degree the more barbaric regions of the Seleucid, the Pergamenian, the southern Arabian, and the Parthian empires\". Scholars have argued that the Incan economy was a flexible type of command economy, centered around the movement and utilization of labor instead of goods. One view of mercantilism sees it as a planned economy.\nThe Soviet-style planned economy evolved from continuing existing World War I war economy as well as other policies, known as war communism, to the requirements of the Russian Civil War. These policies started to be formally consolidated into an official organ of government in 1921, when the Soviet government founded Gosplan. However, the period of the New Economic Policy intervened before regular five-year plans started in 1928. Dirigisme, or government direction of the economy through non-coercive means, was practiced in France and in Great Britain after World War II. The Swedish government planned public-housing models in a similar fashion as urban planning in a project called Million Programme, implemented from 1965 to 1974. Some decentralised participation in economic planning has been implemented across Revolutionary Spain, most notably in Catalonia, during the Spanish Revolution of 1936.\nRelationship with socialism.\nWhile socialism is not equivalent to economic planning or to the concept of a planned economy, an influential conception of socialism involves the replacement of capital markets with some form of economic planning in order to achieve \"ex-ante\" coordination of the economy. The goal of such an economic system would be to achieve conscious control over the economy by the population, specifically so that the use of the surplus product is controlled by the producers. The specific forms of planning proposed for socialism and their feasibility are subjects of the socialist calculation debate.\nComputational economic planning.\nWhen the development of computer technology was still its early stages in 1971, the socialist Allende administration of Chile launched Project Cybersyn to install a telex machine in every corporation and organisation in the economy for the communication of economic data between firms and the government. The data was also fed into a computer-simulated economy for forecasting. A control room was built for realtime observation and management of the overall economy. The prototype-stage of the project showed promise when it was used to redirect supplies around a trucker's strike, but after CIA-backed Augusto Pinochet led a coup in 1973 that established a military dictatorship under his rule the program was abolished and Pinochet moved Chile towards a more liberalized market economy.\nIn their book \"Towards a New Socialism\" (1993), the computer scientist Paul Cockshott from the University of Glasgow and the economist Allin Cottrell from the Wake Forest University claim to demonstrate how a democratically planned economy built on modern computer technology is possible and drives the thesis that it would be both economically more stable than the free-market economies and also morally desirable.\nCybernetics.\nThe use of computers to coordinate production in an optimal fashion has been variously proposed for socialist economies. The Polish economist Oskar Lange argued that the computer is more efficient than the market process at solving the multitude of simultaneous equations required for allocating economic inputs efficiently (either in terms of physical quantities or monetary prices).\nThe 1970 Chilean distributed decision support system Project Cybersyn was pioneered by Salvador Allende's socialist government in an attempt to move towards a decentralised planned economy with the experimental viable system model of computed organisational structure of autonomous operative units though an algedonic feedback setting and bottom-up participative decision-making in the form of participative democracy by the Cyberfolk component.\nFictional portrayals.\nThe 1888 novel \"Looking Backward\" by Edward Bellamy depicts a fictional planned economy in a United States around the year 2000 which has become a socialist utopia.\nThe World State in Aldous Huxley's \"Brave New World\" and Airstrip One in George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" are both fictional examples of command economies, albeit with diametrically opposed aims. The former is a consumer economy designed to engender productivity while the latter is a shortage economy designed as an agent of totalitarian social control. Airstrip One is organized by the euphemistically named Ministry of Plenty.\nOther literary portrayals of planned economies were Yevgeny Zamyatin's \"We\" which was an influence on Orwell's work. Like \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", Ayn Rand's dystopian story \"Anthem\" was also an artistic portrayal of a command economy that was influenced by \"We\". The difference is that it was a primitivist planned economy as opposed to the advanced technology of \"We\" or \"Brave New World\".\nCentral planning.\nAdvantages.\nThe government can harness land, labour, and capital to serve the economic objectives of the state. Consumer demand can be restrained in favor of greater capital investment for economic development in a desired pattern. In international comparisons, state-socialist nations compared favorably with capitalist nations in health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy. However, the reality of this, at least in regards to infant mortality, varied depending on whether official Soviet statistics or WHO definitions were used.\nThe state can begin building massive heavy industries at once in an underdeveloped economy without waiting years for capital to accumulate through the expansion of light industry and without reliance on external financing. This is what happened in the Soviet Union during the 1930s when the government forced the share of gross national income dedicated to private consumption from eighty percent to fifty percent. As a result of this development, the Soviet Union experienced massive growth in heavy industry, with a concurrent massive contraction of its agricultural sector due to labour shortage, in both relative and absolute terms.\nCriticism of Central Planning.\nEconomic instability.\nStudies of command economies of the Eastern Bloc in the 1950s and 1960s by both American and Eastern European economists found that contrary to the expectations of both groups they showed greater fluctuations in output than market economies during the same period.\nInefficient resource distribution.\nCritics of planned economies argue that planners cannot detect consumer preferences, shortages and surpluses with sufficient accuracy and therefore cannot efficiently co-ordinate production (in a market economy, a free price system is intended to serve this purpose). This difficulty was notably written about by economists Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek, who referred to subtly distinct aspects of the problem as the economic calculation problem and local knowledge problem, respectively.\nWhereas the former stressed the theoretical underpinnings of a market economy to subjective value theory while attacking the labor theory of value, the latter argued that the only way to satisfy individuals who have a constantly changing hierarchy of needs and are the only ones to possess their particular individual's circumstances is by allowing those with the most knowledge of their needs to have it in their power to use their resources in a competing marketplace to meet the needs of the most consumers most efficiently. This phenomenon is recognized as spontaneous order. Additionally, misallocation of resources would naturally ensue by redirecting capital away from individuals with direct knowledge and circumventing it into markets where a coercive monopoly influences behavior, ignoring market signals. According to Tibor Machan, \"[w]ithout a market in which allocations can be made in obedience to the law of supply and demand, it is difficult or impossible to funnel resources with respect to actual human preferences and goals\".\nSuppression of economic democracy and self-management.\nEconomist Robin Hahnel, who supports participatory economics, a form of socialist decentralized planned economy, notes that even if central planning overcame its inherent inhibitions of incentives and innovation, it would nevertheless be unable to maximize economic democracy and self-management, which he believes are concepts that are more intellectually coherent, consistent and just than mainstream notions of economic freedom. Furthermore, Hahnel states:\nCombined with a more democratic political system, and redone to closer approximate a best case version, centrally planned economies no doubt would have performed better. But they could never have delivered economic self-management, they would always have been slow to innovate as apathy and frustration took their inevitable toll, and they would always have been susceptible to growing inequities and inefficiencies as the effects of differential economic power grew. Under central planning neither planners, managers, nor workers had incentives to promote the social economic interest. Nor did impeding markets for final goods to the planning system enfranchise consumers in meaningful ways. But central planning would have been incompatible with economic democracy even if it had overcome its information and incentive liabilities. And the truth is that it survived as long as it did only because it was propped up by unprecedented totalitarian political power.\nCommand economy.\nPlanned economies contrast with command economies in that a planned economy is \"an economic system in which the government controls and regulates production, distribution, prices, etc.\" whereas a command economy necessarily has substantial public ownership of industry while also having this type of regulation. In command economies, important allocation decisions are made by government authorities and are imposed by law.\nThis goes against the Marxist understanding of conscious planning. Decentralized planning has been proposed as a basis for socialism and has been variously advocated by anarchists, council communists, libertarian Marxists and other democratic and libertarian socialists who advocate a non-market form of socialism, in total rejection of the type of planning adopted in the economy of the Soviet Union.\nMost of a command economy is organized in a top-down administrative model by a central authority, where decisions regarding investment and production output requirements are decided upon at the top in the chain of command, with little input from lower levels. Advocates of economic planning have sometimes been staunch critics of these command economies. Leon Trotsky believed that those at the top of the chain of command, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operated without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy and who understand/respond to local conditions and changes in the economy. Therefore, they would be unable to effectively coordinate all economic activity.\nHistorians have associated planned economies with Marxist\u2013Leninist states and the Soviet economic model. Since the 1980s, it was recognized that the Soviet economic model did not actually constitute a planned economy in that a comprehensive and binding plan did not guide production and investment. The further distinction of an administrative-command system emerged as a new designation in some academic circles for the economic system that existed in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc, highlighting the role of centralized hierarchical decision-making in the absence of popular control over the economy. The possibility of a digital planned economy was explored in Chile between 1971 and 1973 with the development of Project Cybersyn and by , head of the Department of Technical Physics in Kiev in 1962.\nWhile both economic planning and a planned economy can be either authoritarian or democratic and participatory, democratic socialist critics argue that command economies have been authoritarian or undemocratic in practice. Indicative planning is a form of economic planning in market economies that directs the economy through incentive-based methods. Economic planning can be practiced in a decentralized manner through different government authorities. In some predominantly market-oriented and Western mixed economies, the state utilizes economic planning in strategic industries such as the aerospace industry. Mixed economies usually employ macroeconomic planning while micro-economic affairs are left to the market and price system.\nDecentralized planning.\nA decentralized-planned economy, occasionally called horizontally-planned economy due to its horizontalism, is a type of planned economy in which the investment and allocation of consumer and capital goods is explicated accordingly to an economy-wide plan built and operatively coordinated through a distributed network of disparate economic agents or even production units itself. Decentralized planning is usually held in contrast to centralized planning, in particular the Soviet-type economic planning of the Soviet Union's command economy, where economic information is aggregated and used to formulate a plan for production, investment and resource allocation by a single central authority. Decentralized planning can take shape both in the context of a mixed economy as well as in a post-capitalist economic system. This form of economic planning implies some process of democratic and participatory decision-making within the economy and within firms itself in the form of industrial democracy. Computer-based forms of democratic economic planning and coordination between economic enterprises have also been proposed by various computer scientists and radical economists. Proponents present decentralized and participatory economic planning as an alternative to market socialism for a post-capitalist society.\nDecentralized planning has been a feature of anarchist and other socialist economics. Variations of decentralized planning such as economic democracy, industrial democracy and participatory economics have been promoted by various political groups, most notably anarchists, democratic socialists, guild socialists, libertarian Marxists, libertarian socialists, revolutionary syndicalists and Trotskyists. During the Spanish Revolution, some areas where anarchist and libertarian socialist influence through the CNT and UGT was extensive, particularly rural regions, were run on the basis of decentralized planning resembling the principles laid out by anarcho-syndicalist Diego Abad de Santillan in the book \"After the Revolution\".\nModels.\nNegotiated coordination.\nEconomist Pat Devine has created a model of decentralized economic planning called \"negotiated coordination\" which is based upon social ownership of the means of production by those affected by the use of the assets involved, with the allocation of consumer and capital goods made through a participatory form of decision-making by those at the most localized level of production. Moreover, organizations that utilize modularity in their production processes may distribute problem solving and decision making.\nParticipatory planning.\nThe planning structure of a decentralized planned economy is generally based on a consumers council and producer council (or jointly, a distributive cooperative) which is sometimes called a consumers' cooperative. Producers and consumers, or their representatives, negotiate the quality and quantity of what is to be produced. This structure is central to guild socialism, participatory economics and the economic theories related to anarchism.\nPractice.\nKerala.\nSome decentralised participation in economic planning has been implemented in various regions and states in India, most notably in Kerala. Local level planning agencies assess the needs of people who are able to give their direct input through the Gram Sabhas (village-based institutions) and the planners subsequently seek to plan accordingly.\nRevolutionary Catalonia.\nSome decentralised participation in economic planning has been implemented across Revolutionary Spain, most notably in Catalonia, during the Spanish Revolution of 1936.\nSimilar concepts in practice.\nCommunity participatory planning.\nThe United Nations has developed local projects that promote participatory planning on a community level. Members of communities take decisions regarding community development directly."}
{"id": "7844", "revid": "25807664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7844", "title": "Chimpanzee", "text": "The chimpanzee (\"Pan troglodytes\"), also known as the common chimpanzee, robust chimpanzee, or simply chimp, is a species of great ape native to the forest and savannah of tropical Africa. It has four confirmed subspecies and a fifth proposed subspecies. The chimpanzee and the closely related bonobo (sometimes called the \"pygmy chimpanzee\") are classified in the genus \"Pan\". Evidence from fossils and DNA sequencing shows that \"Pan\" is a sister taxon to the human lineage and is humans' closest living relative.\nThe chimpanzee is covered in coarse black hair, but has a bare face, fingers, toes, palms of the hands, and soles of the feet. It is larger and more robust than the bonobo, weighing for males and for females and standing . Its gestation period is eight months. The infant is weaned at about three years old, but usually maintains a close relationship with its mother for several years more. The chimpanzee lives in groups that range in size from 15 to 150 members, although individuals travel and forage in much smaller groups during the day. The species lives in a strict male-dominated hierarchy, where disputes are generally settled without the need for violence. Nearly all chimpanzee populations have been recorded using tools, modifying sticks, rocks, grass and leaves and using them for hunting and acquiring honey, termites, ants, nuts and water. The species has also been found creating sharpened sticks to spear small mammals.\nThe chimpanzee is listed on the IUCN Red List as an endangered species. Between 170,000 and 300,000 individuals are estimated across its range. The biggest threats to the chimpanzee are habitat loss, poaching, and disease. Chimpanzees appear in Western popular culture as stereotyped clown-figures, and have featured in entertainments such as chimpanzees' tea parties, circus acts and stage shows. They are sometimes kept as pets, though their strength and aggressiveness makes them dangerous in this role. Some hundreds have been kept in laboratories for research, especially in America. Many attempts have been made to teach languages such as American Sign Language to chimpanzees, with limited success.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"chimpanzee\" is first recorded in 1738. It is derived from Vili \"ci-mpenze\" or Tshiluba language \"chimpenze\", with a meaning of \"ape\". The colloquialism \"chimp\" was most likely coined some time in the late 1870s. The genus name \"Pan\" derives from the Greek god, while the specific name \"troglodytes\" was taken from the Troglodytae, a mythical race of cave-dwellers.\nTaxonomy and genetics.\nThe first great ape known to Western science in the 17th century was the \"orang-outang\" (genus \"Pongo\"), the local Malay name being recorded in Java by the Dutch physician Jacobus Bontius. In 1641, the Dutch anatomist Nicolaes Tulp applied the name to a chimpanzee or bonobo brought to the Netherlands from Angola. Another Dutch anatomist, Peter Camper, dissected specimens from Central Africa and Southeast Asia in the 1770s, noting the differences between the African and Asian apes. The German naturalist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach classified the chimpanzee as \"Simia troglodytes\" by 1775. Another German naturalist, Lorenz Oken, coined the genus \"Pan\" in 1816. The bonobo was recognised as distinct from the chimpanzee by 1933.\nEvolution.\nDespite a large number of \"Homo\" fossil finds, \"Pan\" fossils were not described until 2005. Existing chimpanzee populations in West and Central Africa do not overlap with the major human fossil sites in East Africa, but chimpanzee fossils have now been reported from Kenya. This indicates that both humans and members of the \"Pan\" clade were present in the East African Rift Valley during the Middle Pleistocene.\nDNA evidence suggests the bonobo and chimpanzee species separated from each other less than one million years ago (similar in relation between \"Homo sapiens\" and Neanderthals). A 2017 genetic study suggests ancient gene flow (introgression) between 200 and 550 thousand years ago from the bonobo into the ancestors of central and eastern chimpanzees. The chimpanzee line split from the last common ancestor of the human line around six million years ago. Because no species other than \"Homo sapiens\" has survived from the human line of that branching, both chimpanzee species are the closest living relatives of humans; the lineage of humans and chimpanzees diverged from gorillas (genus \"Gorilla\") about seven million years ago. A 2003 study argues the chimpanzee should be included in the human branch as \"Homo troglodytes\", and notes \"experts say many scientists are likely to resist the reclassification, especially in the emotionally-charged and often disputed field of anthropology\".\nSubspecies and population status.\nFour subspecies of the chimpanzee have been recognised, with the possibility of a fifth:\nGenome.\nHuman and chimpanzee DNA is very similar. A Chimpanzee Genome Project was initiated after the completion of the Human Genome Project. In December 2003, a preliminary analysis of 7600 genes shared between the two genomes confirmed that certain genes, such as the forkhead-box P2 transcription factor which is involved in speech development, have undergone rapid evolution in the human lineage. A draft version of the chimpanzee genome was published on 1 September 2005 by the Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium.\nThe DNA sequence differences between humans and chimpanzees consist of about 35 million single-nucleotide changes, five million insertion/deletion events, and various chromosomal rearrangements. Typical human and chimp protein homologs differ in an average of only two amino acids. About 30% of all human proteins are identical in sequence to the corresponding chimp protein. Duplications of small parts of chromosomes have been the major source of differences between human and chimp genetic material; about 2.7% of the corresponding modern genomes represent differences, produced by gene duplications or deletions, since humans and chimps diverged from their common evolutionary ancestor.\nPhysical attributes.\nAdult chimpanzees have an average standing height of . Wild adult males weigh between with females weighing between . In exceptional cases, certain individuals may considerably exceed these measurements, standing over 168\u00a0cm (5 ft 6 in) on two legs and weighing up to 136\u00a0kg (300 lb) in captivity.\nThe chimpanzee is more robustly built than the bonobo but less than the gorilla. The arms of a chimp are longer than its legs, and can reach below the knees. The hands have long fingers with short thumbs and flat fingernails. The feet are adapted for grasping, the big toe being opposable. The pelvis is long with an extended ilium. A chimp's head is rounded with a prominent and prognathous face and a pronounced brow ridge. It has forward-facing eyes, a small nose, rounded non-lobed ears, a long mobile upper lip and, in adult males, sharp canine teeth. Chimps lack the prominent sagittal crest and associated head and neck musculature of gorillas.\nChimpanzee bodies are covered by coarse hair, except for the face, fingers, toes, palms of the hands, and soles of the feet. Chimps lose more hair as they age, and develop bald spots. The hair of a chimp is typically black but can be brown or ginger. As they get older, white or grey patches may appear, particularly on the chin and lower region. The skin may range from pale to dark, females develop swelling pink skin when in oestrus.\nChimpanzees are adapted for both arboreal and terrestrial locomotion. Arboreal locomotion consists of vertical climbing and brachiation. On the ground chimps move both quadrupedally and bipedally, which appear to have similar energy costs. As with bonobos and gorillas, chimps move quadrupedally by knuckle-walking, which probably evolved independently in \"Pan\" and \"Gorilla\". The physical strength of chimps is around 1.5 times greater than humans, due to higher content of fast twitch muscle fibres, one of the chimpanzee's adaptations for climbing and swinging. According to Japan's Asahiyama Zoo, the grip strength of an adult chimpanzee is estimated to be 200 kg (441 lb), while other sources claim figures of up to 330 kg (727 lb).\nEcology.\nThe chimpanzee is a highly adaptable species. It lives in a variety of habitats, including dry savanna, evergreen rainforest, montane forest, swamp forest and dry woodland-savanna mosaic. In Gombe, the chimpanzee mostly uses semideciduous and evergreen forest as well as open woodland. At Bossou, the chimpanzee inhabits multistage secondary deciduous forest, which has grown after shifting cultivation, as well as primary forest and grassland. At Ta\u00ef, it is found in the last remaining tropical rain forest in Ivory Coast. The chimpanzee has an advanced cognitive map of its home range and can repeatedly find food. The chimpanzee makes a night nest in a tree in a new location every night, with every chimpanzee in a separate nest other than infants or juvenile chimpanzees, which sleep with their mothers.\nDiet.\nThe chimpanzee is an omnivorous frugivore. It prefers fruit above all other food items but also eats leaves and leaf buds, seeds, blossoms, stems, pith, bark and resin. A study in Budongo Forest, Uganda found that 64.5% of their chimp feeding time concentrated on fruits (84.6% of which being ripe), particularly those from two species of \"Ficus\", \"Maesopsis eminii\" and \"Celtis durandii\". In addition, 19% of feeding time was spent on arboreal leaves, mostly \"Broussonetia papyrifera\" and \"Celtis mildbraedii\". While the chimpanzee is mostly herbivorous, it does eat honey, soil, insects, birds and their eggs, and small to medium-sized mammals, including other primates. Insect species consumed include the weaver ant \"Oecophylla longinoda\", \"Macrotermes\" termites and honey bees. The western red colobus ranks at the top of preferred mammal prey. Other mammalian prey include red-tailed monkeys, infant and juvenile yellow baboons, bush babies, blue duikers, bushbucks, and common warthogs.\nDespite the fact that chimpanzees are known to hunt, and to collect insects and other invertebrates, such food actually makes up a very small portion of their diet, from as little as 2% yearly to as much as 65 grams of animal flesh per day for each adult chimpanzee in peak hunting seasons. This also varies from troop to troop and year to year. However, in all cases, the majority of their diet consists of fruits, leaves, roots, and other plant matter. Female chimpanzees appear to consume much less animal flesh than males, according to several studies. Jane Goodall documented many occasions within Gombe Stream National Park of chimpanzees and western red colobus monkeys ignoring each other within close proximity.\nChimpanzees do not appear to directly compete with gorillas in areas where they overlap. When fruit is abundant gorilla and chimp diets converge, but when fruit is scarce gorillas resort to vegetation. The two apes may also feed on different species, whether fruit or insects. Chimps and gorillas usually ignore or avoid each other when feeding on the same tree, although hostile encounters have occasionally been documented.\nMortality and health.\nThe average lifespan of a chimpanzee in the wild is relatively short, usually less than 15 years, although individuals that reach 12 years may live an additional 15. Wild individuals may live over 25 years and on rare occasions, around 60 years. Captive chimps tend to live longer, with median lifespans of 31.7 years for males and 38.7 years for females. The oldest known captive chimp to have been documented lived to 66 years.\nLeopards prey on chimpanzees in some areas. It is possible that much of the mortality caused by leopards can be attributed to individuals that have specialised in chimp-killing. Chimps may react to a leopard's presence with loud vocalising, branch shaking and throwing objects. There is at least one record of chimps killing a leopard cub, after mobbing it and its mother in their den. Four chimpanzees could have fallen prey to lions at Mahale Mountains National Park. Although no other instances of lion predation on chimpanzees have been recorded, lions likely do kill chimps occasionally and the larger group sizes of savanna chimps may have developed as a response to threats from these big cats. Chimps may react to lions by fleeing up trees, vocalising or hiding in silence.\nChimps and humans share only 50% of their parasite and microbe species. This is due to the differences in environmental and dietary adaptations; human internal parasite species overlap more with omnivorous, savanna-dwelling baboons. The chimpanzee is host to the louse species \"Pediculus schaeffi\", a close relative of \"P. humanus\" which infests human head and body hair. By contrast, the human pubic louse \"Pthirus pubis\" is closely related to \"Pthirus gorillae\" which infests gorillas. A 2017 study of gastrointestinal parasites of wild chimps in degraded forest in Uganda found nine species of protozoa, five nematodes, one cestode, and one trematode. The most prevalent species was the protozoan \"Troglodytella abrassarti\".\nBehaviour.\nRecent studies have suggested that human observers influence chimpanzee behaviour. One suggestion is that drones, camera traps and remote microphones should be used to record and monitor chimpanzees rather than direct observation.\nGroup structure.\nChimpanzees live in communities that typically range from around 20 to more than 150 members, but spend most of their time travelling in small, temporary groups consisting of a few individuals, which may consist of any combination of age and sex classes. Both males and females sometimes travel alone. This fission-fusion society may include groups of four types: all-male, adult females and offspring, both sexes, or one female and her offspring. These smaller groups emerge in a variety of types, for a variety of purposes. For example, an all-male troop may be organised to hunt for meat, while a group consisting of lactating females serves to act as a \"nursery group\" for the young.\nAt the core of social structures are males, which patrol the territory, protect group members, and search for food. Males remain in their natal communities, while females generally emigrate at adolescence. As such, males in a community are more likely to be related to one another than females are to each other. Among males there is generally a dominance hierarchy, and males are dominant over females. However, this unusual fission-fusion social structure, \"in which portions of the parent group may on a regular basis separate from and then rejoin the rest,\" is highly variable in terms of which particular individual chimpanzees congregate at a given time. This is caused mainly by the large measure of individual autonomy that individuals have within their fission-fusion social groups. As a result, individual chimpanzees often forage for food alone, or in smaller groups as opposed to the much larger \"parent\" group, which encompasses all the chimpanzees which regularly come into contact and congregate into parties in a particular area.\nMale chimpanzees exist in a linear dominance hierarchy. Top-ranking males tend to be aggressive even during dominance stability. This is probably due to the chimp's fission-fusion society, with male chimps leaving groups and returning after extended periods of time. With this, a dominant male is unsure if any \"political maneuvering\" has occurred in his absence and must re-establish his dominance. Thus, a large amount of aggression occurs within five to fifteen minutes after a reunion. During these encounters, displays of aggression are generally preferred over physical attacks. While chimpanzee social structure is often referred to as patriarchal, it is not entirely unheard of for females to forge coalitions against males. There is also at least one recorded case of females securing a dominant position over males in their respective troop, albeit in a captive environment.\nMales maintain and improve their social ranks by forming coalitions, which have been characterised as \"exploitative\" and are based on an individual's influence in agonistic interactions. Being in a coalition allows males to dominate a third individual when they could not by themselves, as politically apt chimps can exert power over aggressive interactions regardless of their rank. Coalitions can also give an individual male the confidence to challenge a dominant or larger male. The more allies a male has, the better his chance of becoming dominant. However, most changes in hierarchical rank are caused by dyadic interactions. Chimpanzee alliances can be very fickle and one member may suddenly turn on another if it is to his advantage.\nLow-ranking males frequently switch sides in disputes between more dominant individuals. Low-ranking males benefit from an unstable hierarchy and often find increased sexual opportunities if a dispute or conflict occurs. In addition, conflicts between dominant males cause them to focus on each other rather than the lower-ranking males. Social hierarchies among adult females tend to be weaker. Nevertheless, the status of an adult female may be important for her offspring. Females in Ta\u00ef have also been recorded to form alliances. Social grooming appears to be important in the formation and maintenance of coalitions. It is more common among adult males than adult females and between males and females.\nChimpanzees have been described as highly territorial and will frequently kill other chimps, although Margaret Power wrote in her 1991 book \"The Egalitarians\" that the field studies from which the aggressive data came, Gombe and Mahale, used artificial feeding systems that increased aggression in the chimpanzee populations studied, and might not reflect innate characteristics of the species as a whole as such. In the years following her artificial feeding conditions at Gombe, Jane Goodall described groups of male chimps patrolling the borders of their territory, brutally attacking chimps which had split off from the Gombe group. A study published in 2010 found that the chimpanzees' wage wars over territory, not mates. Patrols from smaller groups are more likely to avoid contact with their neighbours. Patrols from large groups even take over a smaller group's territory, gaining access to more resources, food, and females. While it was traditionally accepted that only female chimpanzees immigrate and males remain in their natal troop for life, there are confirmed cases of adult males safely integrating themselves into new communities among West African chimpanzees, suggesting they are less territorial than other subspecies.\nMating and parenting.\nChimpanzees mate throughout the year, although the number of females in oestrus varies seasonally in a group. Female chimps are more likely to come into oestrus when food is readily available. Oestrous females exhibit sexual swellings. Chimps are promiscuous; during oestrus, females mate with several males in their community, while males have large testicles for sperm competition. Other forms of mating also exist. A community's dominant males sometimes restrict reproductive access to females. A male and female can form a consortship and mate outside their community. In addition, females sometimes leave their community and mate with males from neighboring communities.\nThese alternative mating strategies give females more mating opportunities without losing the support of the males in their community. Infanticide has been recorded in chimp communities in some areas and the victims are often consumed. Male chimps practice infanticide on unrelated young to shorten the interbirth intervals in the females. Females sometimes practice infanticide; this may be related to the dominance hierarchy in females, or may simply be pathological.\nCopulation is brief, lasting approximately seven seconds. The gestation period is eight months. Care for the young is provided mostly by their mothers. The survival and emotional health of the young is dependent on maternal care. Mothers provide their young with food, warmth, and protection, and teach them certain skills. In addition, a chimp's future rank may be dependent on its mother's status. Newborn chimps are helpless; their grasping reflex is not strong enough to support them for more than a few seconds. For their first 30 days, infants cling to their mother's bellies. Infants are unable to support their own weight for their first two months and need their mothers' support.\nWhen they reach five to six months, infants ride on their mothers' backs. They remain in continual contact for the rest of their first year. When they reach two years of age, they are able to move and sit independently, and start moving beyond the arms reach of their mothers. By four to six years, chimps are weaned and infancy ends. The juvenile period for chimps lasts from their sixth to ninth years. Juveniles remain close to their mothers, but interact an increasing amount with other members of their community. Adolescent females move between groups and are supported by their mothers in agonistic encounters. Adolescent males spend time with adult males in social activities like hunting and boundary patrolling. A captive study suggests males can safely immigrate to a new group if accompanied by immigrant females who have an existing relationship with this male. This gives the resident males reproductive advantages with these females, as they are more inclined to remain in the group if their male friend is also accepted.\nCommunication.\nChimpanzees use facial expressions, postures, and sounds to communicate with each other. Chimps have expressive faces that are important in close-up communications. When frightened, a \"full closed grin\" causes nearby individuals to be fearful, as well. Playful chimps display an open-mouthed grin. Chimps may also express themselves with the \"pout\", which is made in distress, the \"sneer\", which is made when threatening or fearful, and \"compressed-lips face\", which is a type of display. When submitting to a dominant individual, a chimp crunches, bobs, and extends a hand. When in an aggressive mode, a chimp swaggers bipedally, hunched over and arms waving, in an attempt to exaggerate its size. While travelling, chimps keep in contact by beating their hands and feet against the trunks of large trees, an act that is known as \"drumming\". They also do this when encountering individuals from other communities.\nVocalisations are also important in chimp communication. The most common call in adults is the \"pant-hoot\", which may signal social rank and bond as well keep groups together. Pant-hoots are made of four parts, starting with soft \"hoos\", the introduction; that gets louder and louder, the build-up; and climax into screams and sometimes barks; these die down back to soft \"hoos\" during the letdown phase as the call ends. Grunting is made in situations like feeding and greeting. Submissive individuals make \"pant-grunts\" towards their superiors. Whimpering is made by young chimps as a form of begging or when lost from the group. Chimps use distance calls to draw attention to danger, food sources, or other community members. \"Barks\" may be made as \"short barks\" when hunting and \"tonal barks\" when sighting large snakes.\nHunting.\nWhen hunting small monkeys such as the red colobus, chimpanzees hunt where the forest canopy is interrupted or irregular. This allows them to easily corner the monkeys when chasing them in the appropriate direction. Chimps may also hunt as a coordinated team, so that they can corner their prey even in a continuous canopy. During an arboreal hunt, each chimp in the hunting groups has a role. \"Drivers\" serve to keep the prey running in a certain direction and follow them without attempting to make a catch. \"Blockers\" are stationed at the bottom of the trees and climb up to block prey that takes off in a different direction. \"Chasers\" move quickly and try to make a catch. Finally, \"ambushers\" hide and rush out when a monkey nears. While both adults and infants are taken, adult male colobus monkeys will attack the hunting chimps. Male chimps hunt more than females. When caught and killed, the meal is distributed to all hunting party members and even bystanders.\nIntelligence and cognition.\nChimpanzees display numerous signs of intelligence, from the ability to remember symbols to cooperation, tool use, and perhaps language. They are among species that have passed the mirror test, suggesting self-awareness. In one study, two young chimpanzees showed retention of mirror self-recognition after one year without access to mirrors. Chimps also display signs of culture among groups, with the learning and transmission of variations in grooming, tool use and foraging techniques leading to localised traditions.\nA 30-year study at Kyoto University's Primate Research Institute has shown that chimps are able to learn to recognise the numbers 1 to 9 and their values. The chimps further show an aptitude for photographic memory, demonstrated in experiments in which the jumbled digits are flashed onto a computer screen for less than a quarter of a second. One chimp, Ayumu, was able to correctly and quickly point to the positions where they appeared in ascending order. Ayumu performed better than human adults who were given the same test.\nIn controlled experiments on cooperation, chimpanzees show a basic understanding of cooperation, and recruit the best collaborators. In a group setting with a device that delivered food rewards only to cooperating chimpanzees, cooperation first increased, then, due to competitive behaviour, decreased, before finally increasing to the highest level through punishment and other arbitrage behaviours.\nGreat apes show laughter-like vocalisations in response to physical contact, such as wrestling, play chasing, or tickling. This is documented in wild and captive chimpanzees. Chimpanzee laughter is not readily recognisable to humans as such, because it is generated by alternating inhalations and exhalations that sound more like breathing and panting. Instances in which nonhuman primates have expressed joy have been reported. Humans and chimpanzees share similar ticklish areas of the body, such as the armpits and belly. The enjoyment of tickling in chimpanzees does not diminish with age.\nChimpanzees have displayed different behaviours in response to a dying or dead group member. When witnessing a sudden death, the other group members act in frenzy, with vocalisations, aggressive displays, and touching of the corpse. In one case chimps cared for a dying elder, then attended and cleaned the corpse. Afterward, they avoided the spot where the elder died and behaved in a more subdued manner. Mothers have been reported to carry around and groom their dead infants for several days.\nExperimenters, however, now and then witness behaviour that cannot be readily reconciled with chimpanzee intelligence or theory of mind. Wolfgang K\u00f6hler, for instance, reported insightful behaviour in chimpanzees, but he likewise often observed that they experienced \"special difficulty\" in solving simple problems. Researchers also reported that, when faced with a choice between two persons, chimpanzees were just as likely to beg food from a person who could see the begging gesture as from a person who could not, thereby raising the possibility that chimpanzees lack theory of mind.\nTool use.\nNearly all chimpanzee populations have been recorded using tools. They modify sticks, rocks, grass, and leaves and use them when foraging for termites and ants, nuts, honey, algae or water. Despite the lack of complexity, forethought and skill are apparent in making these tools. Chimpanzees have used stone tools since at least 4,300 years ago.\nA chimpanzee from the Kasakela chimpanzee community was the first nonhuman animal reported making a tool, by modifying a twig to use as an instrument for extracting termites from their mound. At Ta\u00ef, chimps simply use their hands to extract termites. When foraging for honey, chimps use modified short sticks to scoop the honey out of the hive, that is, if the bees are stingless. For hives of the dangerous African honeybees, chimps use longer and thinner sticks to extract the honey.\nChimps also fish for ants using the same tactic. Ant dipping is difficult and some chimps never master it. West African chimps crack open hard nuts with stones or branches. Some forethought in this activity is apparent, as these tools are not found together or where the nuts are collected. Nut cracking is also difficult and must be learned. Chimps also use leaves as sponges or spoons to drink water.\nA recent study revealed the use of such advanced tools as spears, which West African chimpanzees in Senegal sharpen with their teeth, being used to spear Senegal bushbabies out of small holes in trees. An eastern chimpanzee has been observed using a modified branch as a tool to capture a squirrel.\nLanguage.\nScientists have attempted to teach human language to several species of great ape. One early attempt by Allen and Beatrix Gardner in the 1960s involved spending 51 months teaching American Sign Language to a chimpanzee named Washoe. The Gardners reported that Washoe learned 151 signs, and had spontaneously taught them to other chimpanzees, including her adopted son, Loulis. Over a longer period of time, Washoe was reported to have learned over 350 signs.\nDebate is ongoing among scientists such as David Premack about chimpanzees' ability to learn language. Since the early reports on Washoe, numerous other studies have been conducted, with varying levels of success. One involved a chimpanzee jokingly named Nim Chimpsky (in allusion to the theorist of language Noam Chomsky), trained by Herbert Terrace of Columbia University. Although his initial reports were quite positive, in November 1979, Terrace and his team, including psycholinguist Thomas Bever, re-evaluated the videotapes of Nim with his trainers, analyzing them frame by frame for signs, as well as for exact context (what was happening both before and after Nim's signs). In the reanalysis, Terrace and Bever concluded that Nim's utterances could be explained merely as prompting on the part of the experimenters, as well as mistakes in reporting the data. \"Much of the apes' behavior is pure drill\", he said. \"Language still stands as an important definition of the human species.\" In this reversal, Terrace now argued Nim's use of ASL was not like human language acquisition. Nim never initiated conversations himself, rarely introduced new words, and mostly imitated what the humans did. More importantly, Nim's word strings varied in their ordering, suggesting that he was incapable of syntax. Nim's sentences also did not grow in length, unlike human children whose vocabulary and sentence length show a strong positive correlation.\nRelations with humans.\nIn culture.\nThe Gio people of Liberia and the Hemba people of the Congo have created masks of the animals. Gio masks are crude and blocky, and worn when teaching young people how not to behave. The Hemba masks have a smile that suggests drunken anger, insanity or horror and are worn during rituals at funerals, representing the \"awful reality of death\". The masks may also serve to guard households and protect both human and plant fertility. Stories have been told of chimps kidnapping and raping women.\nIn Western popular culture, chimpanzees have occasionally been stereotyped as childlike companions, sidekicks or clowns. They are especially suited for the latter role on account of their prominent facial features, long limbs and fast movements, which humans often find amusing. Accordingly, entertainment acts featuring chimpanzees dressed up as humans with lip-synchronised human voices have been traditional staples of circuses, stage shows and TV shows like \"Lancelot Link, Secret Chimp\" (1970-1972) and \"The Chimp Channel\" (1999). From 1926 until 1972, London Zoo, followed by several other zoos around the world, held a chimpanzees' tea party daily, inspiring a long-running series of advertisements for PG Tips tea featuring such a party. Animal rights groups have urged a stop to such acts, considering them abusive.\nChimpanzees in media include Judy on the television series \"Daktari\" in the 1960s and Darwin on \"The Wild Thornberrys\" in the 1990s. In contrast to the fictional depictions of other animals, such as dogs (as in \"Lassie\"), dolphins (\"Flipper\"), horses (\"The Black Stallion\") or even other great apes (\"King Kong\"), chimpanzee characters and actions are rarely relevant to the plot. Depictions of chimpanzees as individuals rather than stock characters, and as central rather than incidental to the plot can be found in science fiction. Robert A. Heinlein's 1947 short story \"Jerry Was a Man\" concerns a genetically enhanced chimpanzee suing for better treatment. The 1972 film \"Conquest of the Planet of the Apes\", the third sequel of the 1968 film \"Planet of the Apes\", portrays a futuristic revolt of enslaved apes led by the only talking chimpanzee, Caesar, against their human masters.\nAs pets.\nChimpanzees have traditionally been kept as pets in a few African villages, especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo. In Virunga National Park in the east of the country, the park authorities regularly confiscate chimpanzees from people keeping them as pets. Outside their range, chimpanzees are popular as exotic pets despite their strength and aggression. Even where keeping non-human primates as pets is illegal, the exotic pet trade continues to prosper, leading to injuries from attacks.\nUse in research.\nHundreds of chimpanzees have been kept in laboratories for research. Most such laboratories either conduct or make the animals available for invasive research, defined as \"inoculation with an infectious agent, surgery or biopsy conducted for the sake of research and not for the sake of the chimpanzee, and/or drug testing\". Research chimpanzees tend to be used repeatedly over decades for up to 40 years, unlike the pattern of use of most laboratory animals. Two federally funded American laboratories use chimps: the Yerkes National Primate Research Center at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, and the Southwest National Primate Center in San Antonio, Texas. Five hundred chimps have been retired from laboratory use in the U.S. and live in animal sanctuaries in the U.S. or Canada.\nA five-year moratorium was imposed by the US National Institutes of Health in 1996, because too many chimps had been bred for HIV research, and it has been extended annually since 2001. With the publication of the chimpanzee genome, plans to increase the use of chimps in America were reportedly increasing in 2006, some scientists arguing that the federal moratorium on breeding chimps for research should be lifted.\nOther researchers argue that chimps either should not be used in research, or should be treated differently, for instance with legal status as persons. Pascal Gagneux, an evolutionary biologist and primate expert at the University of California, San Diego, argues, given chimpanzees' sense of self, tool use, and genetic similarity to human beings, studies using chimps should follow the ethical guidelines used for human subjects unable to give consent. A recent study suggests chimpanzees which are retired from labs exhibit a form of posttraumatic stress disorder. Stuart Zola, director of the Yerkes laboratory, disagrees. He told \"National Geographic\": \"I don't think we should make a distinction between our obligation to treat humanely any species, whether it's a rat or a monkey or a chimpanzee. No matter how much we may wish it, chimps are not human.\"\nOnly one European laboratory, the Biomedical Primate Research Centre in Rijswijk, the Netherlands, used chimpanzees in research. It formerly held 108 chimpanzees among 1,300 non-human primates. The Dutch ministry of science decided to phase out research at the centre from 2001. Trials already under way were however allowed to run their course.\nChimpanzees including the female Ai have been studied at the Primate Research Institute of Kyoto University, Japan, formerly directed by Tetsuro Matsuzawa, since 1978. Some 12 chimpanzees are currently held at the facility.\nField study.\nJane Goodall undertook the first long-term field study of the chimpanzee, begun in Tanzania at Gombe Stream National Park in 1960. Other long-term studies begun in 1960 include A. Kortlandt's in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and Junichiro Itani's in Mahale Mountains National Park in Tanzania. Current understanding of the species' typical behaviours and social organisation has been formed largely from Goodall's ongoing 50-year Gombe research study.\nAttacks.\nChimpanzees have attacked humans. In Uganda, several attacks on children have happened, some of them fatal. Some of these attacks may be due to the chimpanzees being intoxicated (from alcohol obtained from rural brewing operations) and mistaking human children for the western red colobus, one of their favourite meals. Human interactions with chimpanzees may be especially dangerous if the chimpanzees perceive humans as potential rivals. At least six cases of chimpanzees snatching and eating human babies are documented.\nA chimpanzee's strength and sharp teeth mean that attacks, even on adult humans, can cause severe injuries. This was evident after the attack and near death of former NASCAR driver St. James Davis, who was mauled by two escaped chimps while he and his wife were celebrating the birthday of their former pet chimp. Another example of chimpanzees being aggressive toward humans occurred in 2009 in Stamford, Connecticut, when a , 13-year-old pet chimp named Travis attacked his owner's friend, who lost her hands, eyes, nose, and part of her maxilla from the attack.\nHuman immunodeficiency virus.\nTwo types of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infect humans: HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-1 is the more virulent and easily transmitted, and is the source of the majority of HIV infections throughout the world; HIV-2 is largely confined to west Africa. Both types originated in west and central Africa, jumping from other primates to humans. HIV-1 has evolved from a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVcpz) found in the subspecies \"P. t. troglodytes\" of southern Cameroon. Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, has the greatest genetic diversity of HIV-1 so far discovered, suggesting the virus has been there longer than anywhere else. HIV-2 crossed species from a different strain of HIV, found in the sooty mangabey monkeys in Guinea-Bissau.\nStatus and conservation.\nThe chimpanzee is listed on the IUCN Red List as an endangered species. Chimpanzees are legally protected in most of their range, and are found both in and outside national parks. Between 172,700 and 299,700 individuals are thought to be living in the wild, a decrease from about a million chimpanzees in the early 1900s.\nThe biggest threats to the chimpanzee are habitat destruction, poaching, and disease. Chimpanzee habitats have been limited by deforestation in both West and Central Africa. Road building has caused habitat degradation and fragmentation of chimpanzee populations, and may allow poachers more access to areas that had not been seriously affected by humans. Although deforestation rates are low in western Central Africa, selective logging may take place outside national parks.\nChimpanzees are a common target for poachers. In Ivory Coast, chimpanzees make up 1\u20133% of bushmeat sold in urban markets. They are also taken, often illegally, for the pet trade, and are hunted for medicinal purposes in some areas. Farmers sometimes kill chimpanzees that threaten their crops; others are unintentionally maimed or killed by snares meant for other animals.\nInfectious diseases are a main cause of death for chimpanzees. They succumb to many diseases that afflict humans, because the two species are so similar. As human populations grow, so does the risk of disease transmission between humans and chimpanzees."}
{"id": "7845", "revid": "20218033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7845", "title": "Charcot\u2013Marie\u2013Tooth disease", "text": "Charcot\u2013Marie\u2013Tooth disease (CMT) is a hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy of the peripheral nervous system characterized by progressive loss of muscle tissue and touch sensation across various parts of the body. This disease is the most commonly inherited neurological disorder affecting about one in 2,500 people. \nCurrently, there are no curative treatments for this disorder, with care focused on maintaining function. CMT was previously classified as a subtype of muscular dystrophy.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms of CMT usually begin in early childhood or early adulthood, but can begin later. Some people do not experience symptoms until their early 30s or 40s. Usually, the initial symptom is foot drop early in the course of the disease. This can also cause hammer toe, where the toes are always curled. Wasting of muscle tissue of the lower parts of the legs may give rise to a \"stork leg\" or \"inverted champagne bottle\" appearance. Weakness in the hands and forearms occurs in many people as the disease progresses.\nLoss of touch sensation in the feet, ankles, and legs, as well as in the hands, wrists, and arms occurs with various types of the disease. Early- and late-onset forms occur with 'on and off' painful spasmodic muscular contractions that can be disabling when the disease activates. High-arched feet (pes cavus) or flat-arched feet (pes planus) are classically associated with the disorder. Sensory and proprioceptive nerves in the hands and feet are often damaged, while unmyelinated pain nerves are left intact. Overuse of an affected hand or limb can activate symptoms including numbness, spasm, and painful cramping.\nSymptoms and progression of the disease can vary. Involuntary grinding of teeth and squinting are prevalent, and often go unnoticed by the person affected. Breathing can be affected in some, as can hearing, vision, and neck and shoulder muscles. Scoliosis is common, causing hunching and loss of height. Hip sockets can be malformed. Gastrointestinal problems can be part of CMT, as can difficulty chewing, swallowing, and speaking (due to atrophy of vocal cords). A tremor can develop as muscles waste. Pregnancy has been known to exacerbate CMT, as well as severe emotional stress. Patients with CMT must avoid periods of prolonged immobility such as when recovering from a secondary injury, as prolonged periods of limited mobility can drastically accelerate symptoms of CMT.\nPain due to postural changes, skeletal deformations, muscle fatigue, and cramping is fairly common in people with CMT. It can be mitigated or treated by physical therapies, surgeries, and corrective or assistive devices. Analgesic medications may also be needed if other therapies do not provide relief from pain. Neuropathic pain is often a symptom of CMT, though, like other symptoms of CMT, its presence and severity vary from case to case. For some people, pain can be significant to severe and interfere with daily life activities. However, pain is not experienced by all people with CMT. When neuropathic pain is present as a symptom of CMT, it is comparable to that seen in other peripheral neuropathies, as well as postherpetic neuralgia and complex regional pain syndrome, among other diseases.\nCauses.\nCharcot\u2013Marie\u2013Tooth disease is caused by genetic mutations that cause defects in neuronal proteins. Nerve signals are conducted by an axon with a myelin sheath wrapped around it. Most mutations in CMT affect the myelin sheath, but some affect the axon.\nClassification.\nCMT is a heterogeneous disease and the mutations linked to it may occur in a number of different genes. Based on the affected gene, CMT is categorized into several types and subtypes.\nChromosome 17.\nThe most common cause of CMT (70\u201380% of the cases) is the duplication of a large region on the short arm of chromosome 17 that includes the gene \"PMP22\". \nSome mutations affect the gene \"MFN2\", on chromosome 1, which codes for a mitochondrial protein. Mutated \"MFN2\" causes the mitochondria to form large clusters, or clots, which are unable to travel down the axon towards the synapses. This prevents the synapses from functioning.\nX-linked CMT and Schwann cells.\nCMT can also be produced by X-linked mutations, and is named X-linked CMT (CMTX). In CMTX, mutated connexons create non-functional gap junctions that interrupt molecular exchange and signal transport.\nThe mutation can appear in \"GJB1\" coding for connexin 32, a gap junction protein expressed in Schwann cells. Because this protein is also present in oligodendrocytes, demyelination can appear in the CNS.\nSchwann cells create the myelin sheath, by wrapping its plasma membrane around the axon.\nNeurons, Schwann cells, and fibroblasts work together to create a functional nerve. Schwann cells and neurons exchange molecular signals by gap junctions that regulate survival and differentiation. \nDemyelinating Schwann cells causes abnormal axon structure and function. They may cause axon degeneration, or they may simply cause axons to malfunction.\nThe myelin sheath allows nerve cells to conduct signals faster. When the myelin sheath is damaged, nerve signals are slower, and this can be measured by a common neurological test, electromyography. When the axon is damaged, though, this results in a reduced compound muscle action potential.\nDiagnosis.\nCMT can be diagnosed through three different forms of tests: measurement of the speed of nerve impulses (nerve conduction studies), a biopsy of the nerve, and DNA testing. DNA testing can give a definitive diagnosis, but not all the genetic markers for CMT are known. CMT is first most noticed when someone develops lower leg weakness, such as foot drop, or foot deformities, including hammertoes and high arches, but signs alone do not lead to diagnosis. Patients must be referred to a physician specialising in neurology or rehabilitation medicine. To see signs of muscle weakness, the neurologist may ask patients to walk on their heels or to move part of their leg against an opposing force. To identify sensory loss, the neurologist tests for deep-tendon reflexes, such as the knee jerk, which are reduced or absent in CMT. The doctor may also ask the patient's family history since CMT is hereditary. The lack of family history does not rule out CMT, but is helpful to rule out other causes of neuropathy, such as diabetes or exposure to certain chemicals or drugs.\nIn 2010, CMT was one of the first diseases where the genetic cause of a particular patient's disease was precisely determined by sequencing the whole genome of an affected individual. This was done by the scientists employed by the Charcot Marie Tooth Association (CMTA) Two mutations were identified in a gene, \"SH3TC2\", known to cause CMT. Researchers then compared the affected patient's genome to the genomes of the patient's mother, father, and seven siblings with and without the disease. The mother and father each had one normal and one mutant copy of this gene, and had mild or no symptoms. The offspring who inherited two mutant genes presented fully with the disease.\nHistology.\nThe constant cycle of demyelination and remyelination, which occurs in CMT, can lead to the formation of layers of myelin around some nerves, termed an \"onion bulb\". These are also seen in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. Muscles show fiber type grouping, a similarly nonspecific finding that indicates a cycle of denervation/reinnervation. Normally, type I and type II muscle fibers show a checkerboard-like random distribution. However, when reinnervation occurs, the group of fibers associated with one nerve are of the same type. The standard for indicating fiber type is histoenzymatic adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase at pH 9.4).\nManagement.\nOften, the most important goal for patients with CMT is to maintain movement, muscle strength, and flexibility. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach with occupational therapy (OT), physical therapy (PT), orthotist, podiatrist, and or orthopedic surgeon is recommended. PT typically focuses on muscle-strength training, muscle stretching, and aerobic exercise, while OT can provide education on energy conservation strategies and activities of daily living. Physical therapy should be involved in designing an exercise program that fits a person's personal strengths and flexibility. Bracing can also be used to correct problems caused by CMT. An orthotist may address gait abnormalities by prescribing the use of ankle-foot orthoses. These orthoses help control foot drop and ankle instability and often provide a better sense of balance for patients. \nAppropriate footwear is also very important for people with CMT, but they often have difficulty finding well-fitting shoes because of their high arched feet and hammer toes. Due to the lack of good sensory reception in the feet, CMT patients may also need to see a podiatrist for assistance in trimming nails or removing calluses that develop on the pads of the feet. Lastly, patients can also decide to have surgery performed by a podiatrist or an orthopedic surgeon. Surgery may help to stabilize the patients' feet or correct progressive problems. These procedures include straightening and pinning the toes, lowering the arch, and sometimes, fusing the ankle joint to provide stability. CMT patients must take extra care to avoid falling as fractures take longer to heal in someone with an underlying disease process. Additionally, the resulting inactivity may cause the CMT to worsen. The Charcot\u2013Marie\u2013Tooth Association classifies the chemotherapy drug vincristine as a \"definite high risk\" and states, \"vincristine has been proven hazardous and should be avoided by all CMT patients, including those with no symptoms.\" Several corrective surgical procedures can be done to improve the physical condition of the affected individuals.\nPrognosis.\nThe severity of symptoms varies widely even for the same type of CMT. Cases of monozygotic twins with varying levels of disease severity have been reported, showing that identical genotypes are associated with different levels of severity (see penetrance). Some patients are able to live a normal life and are almost or entirely asymptomatic. A 2007 review stated that, \"life expectancy is not known to be altered in the majority of cases.\"\nHistory.\nThe disease is named after those who classically described it: the Frenchman Jean-Martin Charcot (1825\u20131893), his pupil Pierre Marie (1853\u20131940),&lt;ref&gt;&lt;/ref &gt; and the Briton Howard Henry Tooth (1856\u20131925).&lt;ref&gt;&lt;/ref &gt;"}
{"id": "7846", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7846", "title": "Central pontine myelinolysis", "text": "Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM) is a neurological condition involving severe damage to the myelin sheath of nerve cells in the \"pons\" (an area of the brainstem). It is predominately iatrogenic (treatment-induced), and is characterized by acute paralysis, dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), dysarthria (difficulty speaking), and other neurological symptoms.\nCentral pontine myelinolysis was first described as a disorder in 1959. The original paper described four cases with fatal outcomes, and the findings on autopsy. The disease was described as a disease of alcoholics and malnutrition. \u2018Central pontine\u2019 indicated the site of the lesion and \u2018myelinolysis\u2019 was used to emphasise that myelin was affected. The authors intentionally avoided the term \u2018demyelination\u2019 to describe the condition, in order to differentiate this condition from multiple sclerosis and other neuroinflammatory disorders.\nSince this original description, demyelination in other areas of the central nervous system associated with osmotic stress has been described outside the pons (extrapontine). Osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) is the term used for both central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine myelinolysis.\nCentral pontine myelinolysis, and osmotic demyelination syndrome, present most commonly as a complication of treatment of patients with profound hyponatremia (low sodium), which can result from a varied spectrum of conditions, based on different mechanisms. It occurs as a consequence of a rapid rise in serum tonicity following treatment in individuals with chronic, severe hyponatremia who have made intracellular adaptations to the prevailing hypotonicity.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms depend on the regions of the brain involved. Prior to its onset, patients may present with the neurological signs and symptoms of hyponatraemic encephalopathy such as nausea and vomiting, confusion, headache and seizures. These symptoms may resolve with normalisation of the serum sodium concentration. Three to five days later, a second phase of neurological manifestations occurs correlating with the onset of myelinolysis. Observable immediate precursors may include seizures, disturbed consciousness, gait changes, and decrease or cessation of respiratory function.\nThe classical clinical presentation is the progressive development of spastic quadriparesis, pseudobulbar palsy, and emotional lability (pseudobulbar affect), with other more variable neurological features associated with brainstem damage. These result from a rapid myelinolysis of the corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts in the brainstem.\nIn about ten per cent of people with CPM, extrapontine myelinolysis (EPM) is also found. In these cases symptoms of Parkinson's disease may be generated.\nCauses.\nThe most common cause is overly rapid correction of low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia). Apart from rapid correction of hyponatraemia, there are case reports of central pontine myelinolysis in association with hypokalaemia, anorexia nervosa when feeding is started, patients undergoing dialysis and burn victims. There is a case report of central pontine myelinolysis occurring in the context of refeeding syndrome, in the absence of hyponatremia.\nIt has also been known to occur in patients suffering withdrawal symptoms of chronic alcoholism. In these instances, occurrence may be entirely unrelated to hyponatremia or rapid correction of hyponatremia. It could affect patients who take some prescription medicines that are able to cross the blood-brain barrier and cause abnormal thirst reception - in this scenario the CPM is caused by polydipsia leading to low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia).\nIn schizophrenic patients with psychogenic polydipsia, inadequate thirst reception leads to excessive water intake, severely diluting serum sodium. With this excessive thirst combined with psychotic symptoms, brain damage such as CPM may result from hyperosmolarity caused by excess intake of fluids, (primary polydipsia) although this is difficult to determine because such patients are often institutionalised and have a long history of mental health conditions.\nIt has been observed following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.\nCPM may also occur in patients prone to hyponatraemia affected by:\nPathophysiology.\nThe currently accepted theory states that the brain cells adjust their osmolarities by changing levels of certain osmolytes like inositol, betaine, and glutamine in response to varying serum osmolality. In the context of chronic low plasma sodium (hyponatremia), the brain compensates by decreasing the levels of these osmolytes within the cells, so that they can remain relatively isotonic with their surroundings and not absorb too much fluid. The reverse is true in hypernatremia, in which the cells increase their intracellular osmolytes so as not to lose too much fluid to the extracellular space.\nWith correction of the hyponatremia with intravenous fluids, the extracellular tonicity increases, followed by an increase in intracellular tonicity. When the correction is too rapid, not enough time is allowed for the brain's cells to adjust to the new tonicity, namely by increasing the intracellular osmoles mentioned earlier. If the serum sodium levels rise too rapidly, the increased extracellular tonicity will continue to drive water out of the brain's cells. This can lead to cellular dysfunction and CPM.\nDiagnosis.\nIt can be diagnosed clinically in the appropriate context, but may be difficult to confirm radiologically using conventional imaging techniques. Changes are more prominent on MRI than on CT, but often take days or weeks after acute symptom onset to develop. Imaging by MRI typically demonstrates areas of hyperintensity on T2-weighted images.\nTreatment.\nTo minimise the risk of this condition developing from its most common cause, overly rapid reversal of hyponatremia, the hyponatremia should be corrected at a rate not exceeding 10\u00a0mmol/L/24\u00a0h or 0.5\u00a0mEq/L/h; or 18 mEq/L/48hrs; thus avoiding demyelination. No large clinical trials have been performed to examine the efficacy of therapeutic re-lowering of serum sodium, or other interventions sometimes advocated such as steroids or plasma exchange.\nAlcoholic patients should receive vitamin supplementation and a formal evaluation of their nutritional status.\nOnce osmotic demyelination has begun, there is no cure or specific treatment. Care is mainly supportive. Alcoholics are usually given vitamins to correct for other deficiencies. The favourable factors contributing to the good outcome in CPM without hyponatremia were: concurrent treatment of all electrolyte disturbances, early intensive care unit involvement at the advent of respiratory complications, early introduction of feeding including thiamine supplements with close monitoring of the electrolyte changes and input.\nResearch has led to improved outcomes. Animal studies suggest that inositol reduces the severity of osmotic demyelination syndrome if given before attempting to correct chronic hyponatraemia. Further study is required before using inositol in humans for this purpose.\nPrognosis.\nThough traditionally the prognosis is considered poor, a good functional recovery is possible. All patients at risk of developing refeeding syndrome should have their electrolytes closely monitored, including sodium, potassium, magnesium, glucose and phosphate.\nRecent data indicate that the prognosis of critically ill patients may even be better than what is generally considered, despite severe initial clinical manifestations and a tendency by the intensivists to underestimate a possible favorable evolution.\nWhile some patients die, most survive and of the survivors, approximately one-third recover; one-third are disabled but are able to live independently; one-third are severely disabled. Permanent disabilities range from minor tremors and ataxia to signs of severe brain damage, such as spastic quadriparesis and locked-in syndrome. Some improvements may be seen over the course of the first several months after the condition stabilizes.\nThe degree of recovery depends on the extent of the original axonal damage."}
{"id": "7849", "revid": "1011573484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7849", "title": "Crystallographic defect", "text": "Crystallographic defects are interruptions of regular patterns in crystalline solids. They are common because positions of atoms or molecules at repeating fixed distances determined by the unit cell parameters in crystals, which exhibit a periodic crystal structure, are usually imperfect.\nPoint defects.\nPoint defects are defects that occur only at or around a single lattice point. They are not extended in space in any dimension. Strict limits for how small a point defect is are generally not defined explicitly. However, these defects typically involve at most a few extra or missing atoms. Larger defects in an ordered structure are usually considered dislocation loops. For historical reasons, many point defects, especially in ionic crystals, are called \"centers\": for example a vacancy in many ionic solids is called a luminescence center, a color center, or F-center. These dislocations permit ionic transport through crystals leading to electrochemical reactions. These are frequently specified using Kr\u00f6ger\u2013Vink notation.\nLine defects.\nLine defects can be described by gauge theories.\nDislocations are linear defects, around which the atoms of the crystal lattice are misaligned.\nThere are two basic types of dislocations, the \"edge\" dislocation and the \"screw\" dislocation. \"Mixed\" dislocations, combining aspects of both types, are also common.\nEdge dislocations are caused by the termination of a plane of atoms in the middle of a crystal. In such a case, the adjacent planes are not straight, but instead bend around the edge of the terminating plane so that the crystal structure is perfectly ordered on either side. The analogy with a stack of paper is apt: if a half a piece of paper is inserted in a stack of paper, the defect in the stack is only noticeable at the edge of the half sheet.\nThe screw dislocation is more difficult to visualise, but basically comprises a structure in which a helical path is traced around the linear defect (dislocation line) by the atomic planes of atoms in the crystal lattice.\nThe presence of dislocation results in lattice strain (distortion). The direction and magnitude of such distortion is expressed in terms of a Burgers vector (b). For an edge type, b is perpendicular to the dislocation line, whereas in the cases of the screw type it is parallel. In metallic materials, b is aligned with close-packed crystallographic directions and its magnitude is equivalent to one interatomic spacing.\nDislocations can move if the atoms from one of the surrounding planes break their bonds and rebond with the atoms at the terminating edge.\nIt is the presence of dislocations and their ability to readily move (and interact) under the influence of stresses induced by external loads that leads to the characteristic malleability of metallic materials.\nDislocations can be observed using transmission electron microscopy, field ion microscopy and atom probe techniques.\nDeep-level transient spectroscopy has been used for studying the electrical activity of dislocations in semiconductors, mainly silicon.\nDisclinations are line defects corresponding to \"adding\" or \"subtracting\" an angle around a line. Basically, this means that if you track the crystal orientation around the line defect, you get a rotation. Usually, they were thought to play a role only in liquid crystals, but recent developments suggest that they might have a role also in solid materials, e.g. leading to the self-healing of cracks.\nMathematical classification methods.\nA successful mathematical classification method for physical lattice defects, which works not only with the theory of dislocations and other defects in crystals but also, e.g., for disclinations in liquid crystals and for excitations in superfluid 3He, is the topological homotopy theory.\nComputer simulation methods.\nDensity functional theory, classical molecular dynamics and kinetic Monte Carlo \nsimulations are widely used to study the properties of defects in solids with computer simulations. \nSimulating jamming of hard spheres of different sizes and/or in containers with non-commeasurable sizes using the Lubachevsky\u2013Stillinger algorithm\ncan be an effective technique for demonstrating some types of crystallographic defects."}
{"id": "7850", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7850", "title": "Chomsky normal form", "text": "In formal language theory, a context-free grammar, \"G\", is said to be in Chomsky normal form (first described by Noam Chomsky) if all of its production rules are of the form:\nwhere \"A\", \"B\", and \"C\" are nonterminal symbols, the letter \"a\" is a terminal symbol (a symbol that represents a constant value), \"S\" is the start symbol, and \u03b5 denotes the empty string. Also, neither \"B\" nor \"C\" may be the start symbol, and the third production rule can only appear if \u03b5 is in \"L\"(\"G\"), the language produced by the context-free grammar \"G\".\nEvery grammar in Chomsky normal form is context-free, and conversely, every context-free grammar can be transformed into an equivalent one which is in Chomsky normal form and has a size no larger than the square of the original grammar's size.\nConverting a grammar to Chomsky normal form.\nTo convert a grammar to Chomsky normal form, a sequence of simple transformations is applied in a certain order; this is described in most textbooks on automata theory.\nThe presentation here follows Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), but is adapted to use the transformation names from Lange, Lei\u00df (2009). Each of the following transformations establishes one of the properties required for Chomsky normal form.\nSTART: Eliminate the start symbol from right-hand sides.\nIntroduce a new start symbol \"S\"0, and a new rule \nwhere \"S\" is the previous start symbol.\nThis does not change the grammar's produced language, and \"S\"0 will not occur on any rule's right-hand side.\nTERM: Eliminate rules with nonsolitary terminals.\nTo eliminate each rule \nwith a terminal symbol \"a\" being not the only symbol on the right-hand side, introduce, for every such terminal, a new nonterminal symbol \"N\"\"a\", and a new rule \nChange every rule \nto \nIf several terminal symbols occur on the right-hand side, simultaneously replace each of them by its associated nonterminal symbol.\nThis does not change the grammar's produced language.\nBIN: Eliminate right-hand sides with more than 2 nonterminals.\nReplace each rule \nwith more than 2 nonterminals \"X\"1...,\"X\"\"n\" by rules \nwhere \"A\"\"i\" are new nonterminal symbols.\nAgain, this does not change the grammar's produced language.\nDEL: Eliminate \u03b5-rules.\nAn \u03b5-rule is a rule of the form \nwhere \"A\" is not \"S\"0, the grammar's start symbol.\nTo eliminate all rules of this form, first determine the set of all nonterminals that derive \u03b5.\nHopcroft and Ullman (1979) call such nonterminals \"nullable\", and compute them as follows:\nObtain an intermediate grammar by replacing each rule \nby all versions with some nullable \"X\"\"i\" omitted.\nBy deleting in this grammar each \u03b5-rule, unless its left-hand side is the start symbol, the transformed grammar is obtained.\nFor example, in the following grammar, with start symbol \"S\"0,\nthe nonterminal \"A\", and hence also \"B\", is nullable, while neither \"C\" nor \"S\"0 is.\nHence the following intermediate grammar is obtained:\nIn this grammar, all \u03b5-rules have been \"inlined at the call site\".\nIn the next step, they can hence be deleted, yielding the grammar:\nThis grammar produces the same language as the original example grammar, viz. {\"ab\",\"aba\",\"abaa\",\"abab\",\"abac\",\"abb\",\"abc\",\"b\",\"bab\",\"bac\",\"bb\",\"bc\",\"c\"}, but has no \u03b5-rules.\nUNIT: Eliminate unit rules.\nA unit rule is a rule of the form \nwhere \"A\", \"B\" are nonterminal symbols.\nTo remove it, for each rule \nwhere \"X\"1 ... \"X\"\"n\" is a string of nonterminals and terminals, add rule \nunless this is a unit rule which has already been (or is being) removed.\nOrder of transformations.\nWhen choosing the order in which the above transformations are to be applied, it has to be considered that some transformations may destroy the result achieved by other ones. For example, START will re-introduce a unit rule if it is applied after UNIT. The table shows which orderings are admitted.\nMoreover, the worst-case bloat in grammar size depends on the transformation order. Using |\"G\"| to denote the size of the original grammar \"G\", the size blow-up in the worst case may range from |\"G\"|2 to 22 |G|, depending on the transformation algorithm used. The blow-up in grammar size depends on the order between DEL and BIN. It may be exponential when DEL is done first, but is linear otherwise. UNIT can incur a quadratic blow-up in the size of the grammar. The orderings START,TERM,BIN,DEL,UNIT and START,BIN,DEL,UNIT,TERM lead to the least (i.e. quadratic) blow-up.\nExample.\nThe following grammar, with start symbol \"Expr\", describes a simplified version of the set of all syntactical valid arithmetic expressions in programming languages like C or Algol60. Both \"number\" and \"variable\" are considered terminal symbols here for simplicity, since in a compiler front-end their internal structure is usually not considered by the parser. The terminal symbol \"^\" denoted exponentiation in Algol60.\nIn step \"START\" of the above conversion algorithm, just a rule \"S\"0\u2192\"Expr\" is added to the grammar.\nAfter step \"TERM\", the grammar looks like this:\nAfter step \"BIN\", the following grammar is obtained:\nSince there are no \u03b5-rules, step \"DEL\" does not change the grammar.\nAfter step \"UNIT\", the following grammar is obtained, which is in Chomsky normal form:\nThe \"N\"\"a\" introduced in step \"TERM\" are \"PowOp\", \"Open\", and \"Close\".\nThe \"A\"\"i\" introduced in step \"BIN\" are \"AddOp_Term\", \"MulOp_Factor\", \"PowOp_Primary\", and \"Expr_Close\".\nAlternative definition.\nChomsky reduced form.\nAnother way to define the Chomsky normal form is:\nA formal grammar is in Chomsky reduced form if all of its production rules are of the form:\nwhere formula_3, formula_4 and formula_5 are nonterminal symbols, and formula_6 is a terminal symbol. When using this definition, formula_4 or formula_5 may be the start symbol. Only those context-free grammars which do not generate the empty string can be transformed into Chomsky reduced form.\nFloyd normal form.\nIn a letter where he proposed a term Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF), Donald E. Knuth implied a BNF \"syntax in which all definitions have such a form may be said to be in 'Floyd Normal Form'\",\nwhere formula_12, formula_13 and formula_14 are nonterminal symbols, and formula_6 is a terminal symbol,\nbecause Robert W. Floyd found any BNF syntax can be converted to the above one in 1961. But he withdrew this term, \"since doubtless many people have independently used this simple fact in their own work, and the point is only incidental to the main considerations of Floyd's note.\" While Floyd's note cites Chomsky's original 1959 article, Knuth's letter does not.\nApplication.\nBesides its theoretical significance, CNF conversion is used in some algorithms as a preprocessing step, e.g., the CYK algorithm, a bottom-up parsing for context-free grammars, and its variant probabilistic CKY."}
{"id": "7851", "revid": "329633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7851", "title": "Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty", "text": "The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is a multilateral treaty that bans all nuclear tests, for both civilian and military purposes, in all environments. It was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 September 1996, but has not entered into force, as eight specific nations have not ratified the treaty.\nHistory.\nThe movement for international control of nuclear weapons began in 1945, with a call from Canada and the United Kingdom for a conference on the subject. In June 1946, Bernard Baruch, an emissary of President Harry S. Truman, proposed the Baruch Plan before the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission, which called for an international system of controls on the production of atomic energy. The plan, which would serve as the basis for United States nuclear policy into the 1950s, was rejected by the Soviet Union as a US ploy to cement its nuclear dominance.\nBetween the Trinity nuclear test of 16 July 1945 and the signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT) on 5 August 1963, 499 nuclear tests were conducted. Much of the impetus for the PTBT, the precursor to the CTBT, was rising public concern surrounding the size and resulting nuclear fallout from underwater and atmospheric nuclear tests, particularly tests of powerful thermonuclear weapons (hydrogen bombs). The Castle Bravo test of 1 March 1954, in particular, attracted significant attention as the detonation resulted in fallout that spread over inhabited areas and sickened a group of Japanese fishermen. Between 1945 and 1963, the US conducted 215 atmospheric tests, the Soviet Union conducted 219, the UK conducted 21, and France conducted three.\nIn 1954, following the Castle Bravo test, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India issued the first appeal for a \"standstill agreement\" on testing, which was soon echoed by the British Labour Party. Negotiations on a comprehensive test ban, primarily involved the US, UK, and the Soviet Union, began in 1955 following a proposal by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev. Of primary concern throughout the negotiations, which would stretch with some interruptions to July 1963, was the system of verifying compliance with the test ban and detecting illicit tests. On the Western side, there were concerns that the Soviet Union would be able to circumvent any test ban and secretly leap ahead in the nuclear arms race. These fears were amplified following the US \"Rainier\" shot of 19 September 1957, which was the first contained underground test of a nuclear weapon. Though the US held a significant advantage in underground testing capabilities, there was worry that the Soviet Union would be able to covertly conduct underground tests during a test ban, as underground detonations were more challenging to detect than above-ground tests. On the Soviet side, conversely, the on-site compliance inspections demanded by the US and UK were seen as amounting to espionage. Disagreement over verification would lead to the Anglo-American and Soviet negotiators abandoning a comprehensive test ban (i.e., a ban on all tests, including those underground) in favor of a partial ban, which would be finalized on 25 July 1963. The PTBT, joined by 123 states following the original three parties, banned detonations for military and civilian purposes underwater, in the atmosphere, and outer space.\nThe PTBT had mixed results. On the one hand, enactment of the treaty was followed by a substantial drop in the atmospheric concentration of radioactive particles. On the other hand, nuclear proliferation was not halted entirely (though it may have been slowed) and nuclear testing continued at a rapid clip. Compared to the 499 tests from 1945 to the signing of the PTBT, 436 tests were conducted over the ten years following the PTBT. Furthermore, US and Soviet underground testing continued \"venting\" radioactive gas into the atmosphere. Additionally, though underground testing was generally safer than above-ground testing, underground tests continued to risk the leaking of radionuclides, including plutonium, into the ground. From 1964 through 1996, the year of the CTBT's adoption, an estimated 1,377 underground nuclear tests were conducted. The final non-underground (atmospheric or underwater) test was conducted by China in 1980.\nThe PTBT has been seen as a step towards the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968, which directly referenced the PTBT. Under the NPT, non-nuclear weapon states were prohibited from possessing, manufacturing, and acquiring nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. All signatories, including nuclear weapon states, were committed to the goal of total nuclear disarmament. However, India, Pakistan, and Israel have declined to sign the NPT on the grounds that such a treaty is fundamentally discriminatory as it places limitations on states that do not have nuclear weapons while making no efforts to curb weapons development by declared nuclear weapons states.\nIn 1974, a step towards a comprehensive test ban was made with the Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT), ratified by the US and Soviet Union, which banned underground tests with yields above 150 kilotons. In April 1976, the two states reached agreement on the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty (PNET), which concerns nuclear detonations outside the weapons sites discussed in the TTBT. As in the TTBT, the US and Soviet Union agreed to bar peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs) at these other locations with yields above 150 kilotons, as well as group explosions with total yields over 1,500 kilotons. To verify compliance, the PNET requires that states rely on national technical means of verification, share information on explosions, and grant on-site access to counterparties. The TTBT and PNET entered into force on 11 December 1990.\nIn October 1977, the US, UK, and Soviet Union returned to negotiations over a test ban. These three nuclear powers made notable progress in the late 1970s, agreeing to terms on a ban on all testing, including a temporary prohibition on PNEs, but continued disagreements over the compliance mechanisms led to an end to negotiations ahead of Ronald Reagan's inauguration as president in 1981. In 1985, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced a unilateral testing moratorium, and in December 1986, Reagan reaffirmed US commitment to pursue the long-term goal of a comprehensive test ban. In November 1987, negotiations on a test ban restarted, followed by a joint US-Soviet program to research underground-test detection in December 1987.\nNegotiations.\nGiven the political situation prevailing in the subsequent decades, little progress was made in nuclear disarmament until the end of the Cold War in 1991. Parties to the PTBT held an amendment conference that year to discuss a proposal to convert the Treaty into an instrument banning all nuclear-weapon tests. With strong support from the UN General Assembly, negotiations for a comprehensive test-ban treaty began in 1993.\nAdoption.\nExtensive efforts were made over the next three years to draft the Treaty text and its two annexes. However, the Conference on Disarmament, in which negotiations were being held, did not succeed in reaching consensus on the adoption of the text. Under the direction of Prime Minister John Howard and Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, Australia then sent the text to the United Nations General Assembly in New York, where it was submitted as a draft resolution. On 10 September 1996, the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) was adopted by a large majority, exceeding two-thirds of the General Assembly's Membership.\nObligations.\n(Article I):\nStatus.\nThe Treaty was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 September 1996. It opened for signature in New York on 24 September 1996, when it was signed by 71 States, including five of the eight then nuclear-capable states. As of February 2021, 170 states have ratified the CTBT and another 15 states have signed but not ratified it.\nThe treaty will enter into force 180 days after the 44 states listed in Annex 2 of the treaty have ratified it. These \"Annex 2 states\" are states that participated in the CTBT's negotiations between 1994 and 1996 and possessed nuclear power reactors or research reactors at that time. As of 2016, eight Annex 2 states have not ratified the treaty: China, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the United States have signed but not ratified the Treaty; India, North Korea and Pakistan have not signed it.\nMonitoring.\nGeophysical and other technologies are used to monitor for compliance with the Treaty: forensic seismology, hydroacoustics, infrasound, and radionuclide monitoring. The first three forms of monitoring are known as wave-form measurements. Seismic monitoring is performed with a system of 50 primary stations located throughout the world, with 120 auxiliary stations in signatory states. Hydroacoustic monitoring is performed with a system of 11 stations that consist of hydrophone triads to monitor for underwater explosions. Hydroacoustic stations can use seismometers to measure T-waves from possible underwater explosions instead of hydrophones. The best measurement of hydroacoustic waves has been found to be at a depth of 1000 m. Infrasound monitoring relies on changes in atmospheric pressure caused by a possible nuclear explosion, with 41 stations certified as of August 2019. One of the biggest concerns with infrasound measurements is noise due to exposure from wind, which can effect the sensor's ability to measure if an event occurred. Together, these technologies are used to monitor the ground, water, and atmosphere for any sign of a nuclear explosion.\nRadionuclide monitoring takes the form of either monitoring for radioactive particulates or noble gases as a product of a nuclear explosion. Radioactive particles emit radiation that can be measured by any of the 80 stations located throughout the world. They are created from nuclear explosions that can collect onto the dust that is moved from the explosion. If a nuclear explosion took place underground, noble gas monitoring can be used to verify whether or not a possible nuclear explosion took place. Noble gas monitoring relies on measuring increases in radioactive xenon gas. Different isotopes of xenon include 131mXe, 133Xe, 133mXe, and 135Xe. All four monitoring methods make up the International Monitoring System (IMS). Statistical theories and methods are integral to CTBT monitoring providing confidence in verification analysis. Once the Treaty enters into force, on-site inspections will be conducted where concerns about compliance arise.\nThe Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), an international organization headquartered in Vienna, Austria, was created to build the verification framework, including establishment and provisional operation of the network of monitoring stations, the creation of an international data centre (IDC), and development of the on-site Inspection capability. The CTBTO is responsible for collecting information from the IMS and distribute the analyzed and raw data to member states to judge whether or not a nuclear explosion occurred through the IDC. Parameters such as determining the location where a nuclear explosion or test took place is one of the things that the IDC can accomplish. If a member state chooses to assert that another state had violated the CTBT, they can request an on-site inspection to take place to verify.\nThe monitoring network consists of 337 facilities located all over the globe. As of May 2012, more than 260 facilities have been certified. The monitoring stations register data that is transmitted to the international data centre in Vienna for processing and analysis. The data are sent to states that have signed the Treaty.\nSubsequent nuclear testing.\nThree countries have tested nuclear weapons since the CTBT opened for signature in 1996. India and Pakistan both carried out two sets of tests in 1998. North Korea carried out six announced tests, one each in 2006, 2009, 2013, two in 2016 and one in 2017. All six North Korean tests were picked up by the International Monitoring System set up by the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission. A North Korean test is believed to have taken place in January 2016, evidenced by an \"artificial earthquake\" measured as a magnitude 5.1 by the U.S. Geological Survey. The first successful North Korean hydrogen bomb test supposedly took place in September 2017. It was estimated to have an explosive yield of 120 kilotons."}
{"id": "7852", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7852", "title": "DisRuption", "text": ""}
{"id": "7853", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7853", "title": "DonegalFiddleTradition", "text": ""}
{"id": "7854", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7854", "title": "DoubleStops", "text": ""}
{"id": "7855", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7855", "title": "DirectRealism", "text": ""}
{"id": "7856", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7856", "title": "DefinitionofBibleTerms", "text": ""}
{"id": "7858", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7858", "title": "DanCe", "text": ""}
{"id": "7859", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7859", "title": "DeconstructionIsm", "text": ""}
{"id": "7861", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7861", "title": "DavidHume", "text": ""}
{"id": "7862", "revid": "11191612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7862", "title": "DagnyTaggart", "text": ""}
{"id": "7863", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7863", "title": "DataEncryptionStandard", "text": ""}
{"id": "7866", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7866", "title": "DefinitioN", "text": ""}
{"id": "7867", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7867", "title": "DefinitionOfPhilosophy", "text": ""}
{"id": "7868", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7868", "title": "DefinitionOfLogic", "text": ""}
{"id": "7870", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7870", "title": "DualIsm", "text": ""}
{"id": "7871", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7871", "title": "DaoDeJing", "text": ""}
{"id": "7872", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7872", "title": "DualisticInteractionism", "text": ""}
{"id": "7875", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7875", "title": "DrewBarrymore", "text": ""}
{"id": "7876", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7876", "title": "DianeticS", "text": ""}
{"id": "7877", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7877", "title": "DesigningExperiments", "text": ""}
{"id": "7880", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7880", "title": "DataSeT", "text": ""}
{"id": "7882", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7882", "title": "DramaFilm", "text": ""}
{"id": "7883", "revid": "86", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7883", "title": "DeweyDecimalSystem", "text": ""}
{"id": "7884", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7884", "title": "DeniseRichards", "text": ""}
{"id": "7885", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7885", "title": "Dance", "text": "Dance is a performing art form consisting of purposefully selected sequences of human movement. This movement has aesthetic and symbolic value, and is acknowledged as dance by performers and observers within a particular culture. Dance can be categorized and described by its choreography, by its repertoire of movements, or by its historical period or place of origin.\nAn important distinction is to be drawn between the contexts of theatrical and participatory dance, although these two categories are not always completely separate; both may have special functions, whether social, ceremonial, competitive, erotic, martial, or sacred/liturgical. Other forms of human movement are sometimes said to have a dance-like quality, including martial arts, gymnastics, cheerleading, figure skating, synchronised swimming, marching bands, and many other forms of athletics.\nPerformance and participation.\nTheatrical dance, also called performance or concert dance, is intended primarily as a spectacle, usually a performance upon a stage by virtuoso dancers. It often tells a story, perhaps using mime, costume and scenery, or else it may simply interpret the musical accompaniment, which is often specially composed. Examples are western ballet and modern dance, Classical Indian dance and Chinese and Japanese song and dance dramas. Most classical forms are centred upon dance alone, but performance dance may also appear in opera and other forms of musical theatre.\nParticipatory dance, on the other hand, whether it be a folk dance, a social dance, a group dance such as a line, circle, chain or square dance, or a partner dance such as is common in western Western ballroom dancing, is undertaken primarily for a common purpose, such as social interaction or exercise, of participants rather than onlookers. Such dance seldom has any narrative. A group dance and a \"corps de ballet\", a social partner dance and a \"pas de deux\", differ profoundly. Even a solo dance may be undertaken solely for the satisfaction of the dancer. Participatory dancers often all employ the same movements and steps but, for example, in the rave culture of electronic dance music, vast crowds may engage in free dance, uncoordinated with those around them. On the other hand, some cultures lay down strict rules as to the particular dances in which, for example, men, women and children may or must participate.\nOrigins.\nArcheological evidence for early dance includes 9,000-year-old paintings in India at the Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka, and Egyptian tomb paintings depicting dancing figures, dated c. 3300 BC. It has been proposed that before the invention of written languages, dance was an important part of the oral and performance methods of passing stories down from one generation to the next. The use of dance in ecstatic trance states and healing rituals (as observed today in many contemporary \"primitive\" cultures, from the Brazilian rainforest to the Kalahari Desert) is thought to have been another early factor in the social development of dance.\nReferences to dance can be found in very early recorded history; Greek dance (\"horos\") is referred to by Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch and Lucian. The Bible and Talmud refer to many events related to dance, and contain over 30 different dance terms. In Chinese pottery as early as the Neolithic period, groups of people are depicted dancing in a line holding hands, and the earliest Chinese word for \"dance\" is found written in the oracle bones. Dance is further described in the \"L\u00fcshi Chunqiu\". Primitive dance in ancient China was associated with sorcery and shamanic rituals.\nDuring the first millennium BCE in India, many texts were composed which attempted to codify aspects of daily life. Bharata Muni's \"Natyashastra\" (literally \"the text of dramaturgy\") is one of the earlier texts. It mainly deals with drama, in which dance plays an important part in Indian culture. It categorizes dance into four types \u2013 secular, ritual, abstract, and, interpretive \u2013 and into four regional varieties. The text elaborates various hand-gestures (\"mudras\") and classifies movements of the various limbs, steps and so on. A strong continuous tradition of dance has since continued in India, through to modern times, where it continues to play a role in culture, ritual, and, notably, the Bollywood entertainment industry. Many other contemporary dance forms can likewise be traced back to historical, traditional, ceremonial, and ethnic dance.\nDance and music.\nDance is generally, though not exclusively, performed with the accompaniment of music and may or may not be performed \"in time\" to such music. Some dance (such as tap dance) may provide its own audible accompaniment in place of (or in addition to) music. Many early forms of music and dance were created for each other and are frequently performed together. Notable examples of traditional dance/music couplings include the jig, waltz, tango, disco, and salsa. Some musical genres have a parallel dance form such as baroque music and baroque dance; other varieties of dance and music may share nomenclature but developed separately, such as classical music and classical ballet.\nDance and rhythm.\nRhythm and dance are deeply linked in history and practice. The American dancer Ted Shawn wrote; \"The conception of rhythm which underlies all studies of the dance is something about which we could talk forever, and still not finish.\" A musical rhythm requires two main elements; first, a regularly-repeating pulse (also called the \"beat\" or \"tactus\") that establishes the tempo and, second, a pattern of accents and rests that establishes the character of the metre or basic rhythmic pattern. The basic pulse is roughly equal in duration to a simple step or gesture.\nDances generally have a characteristic tempo and rhythmic pattern. The tango, for example, is usually danced in time at approximately 66 beats per minute. The basic slow step, called a \"slow\", lasts for one beat, so that a full \"right\u2013left\" step is equal to one measure. The basic forward and backward walk of the dance is so counted \u2013 \"slow-slow\" \u2013 while many additional figures are counted \"slow \u2013 quick-quick.\nJust as musical rhythms are defined by a pattern of strong and weak beats, so repetitive body movements often depends on alternating \"strong\" and \"weak\" muscular movements. Given this alternation of left-right, of forward-backward and rise-fall, along with the bilateral symmetry of the human body, it is natural that many dances and much music are in duple and quadruple meter. However, since some such movements require more time in one phase than the other \u2013 such as the longer time required to lift a hammer than to strike \u2013 some dance rhythms fall equally naturally into triple metre. Occasionally, as in the folk dances of the Balkans, dance traditions depend heavily on more complex rhythms. Further, complex dances composed of a fixed sequence of steps always require phrases and melodies of a certain fixed length to accompany that sequence.\nThe very act of dancing, the steps themselves, generate an \"initial skeleton of rhythmic beats\" that must have preceded any separate musical accompaniment, while dance itself, as much as music, requires time-keeping just as utilitarian repetitive movements such as walking, hauling and digging take on, as they become refined, something of the quality of dance.\nMusical accompaniment therefore arose in the earliest dance, so that ancient Egyptians attributed the origin of the dance to the divine Athotus, who was said to have observed that music accompanying religious rituals caused participants to move rhythmically and to have brought these movements into proportional measure. The same idea, that dance arises from musical rhythm, is still found in renaissance Europe in the works of the dancing master Guglielmo Ebreo da Pesaro who speaks of dance as a physical movement that arises from and expresses inward, spiritual motion agreeing with the \"measures and perfect concords of harmony\" that fall upon the human ear, while, earlier, Mechthild of Magdeburg, seizing upon dance as a symbol of the holy life foreshadowed in Jesus' saying \"I have piped and ye have not danced\", writes;\nThoinot Arbeau's celebrated 16th century dance-treatise \"Orch\u00e9sographie\", indeed, begins with definitions of over eighty distinct drum-rhythms.\nAs has been shown above, dance has been represented through the ages as having emerged as a response to music yet, as Lincoln Kirstein implied, it is at least as likely that primitive music arose from dance. Shawn concurs, stating that dance \"was the first art of the human race, and the matrix out of which all other arts grew\" and that even the \"metre in our poetry today is a result of the accents necessitated by body movement, as the dancing and reciting were performed simultaneously\" \u2013 an assertion somewhat supported by the common use of the term \"foot\" to describe the fundamental rhythmic units of poetry.\nScholes, not a dancer but a musician, offers support for this view, stating that the steady measures of music, of two, three or four beats to the bar, its equal and balanced phrases, regular cadences, contrasts and repetitions, may all be attributed to the \"incalculable\" influence of dance upon music.\n\u00c9mile Jaques-Dalcroze, primarily a musician and teacher, relates how a study of the physical movements of pianists led him \"to the discovery that musical sensations of a rhythmic nature call for the muscular and nervous response of the whole organism\", to develop \"a special training designed to regulate nervous reactions and effect a co-ordination of muscles and nerves\" and ultimately to seek the connections between \"the art of music and the art of dance\", which he formulated into his system of eurhythmics. He concluded that \"musical rhythm is only the transposition into sound of movements and dynamisms spontaneously and involuntarily expressing emotion\".\nHence, though doubtless, as Shawn asserts, \"it is quite possible to develop the dance without music and... music is perfectly capable of standing on its own feet without any assistance from the dance\", nevertheless the \"two arts will always be related and the relationship can be profitable both to the dance and to music\", the precedence of one art over the other being a moot point. The common ballad measures of hymns and folk-songs takes their name from dance, as does the carol, originally a circle dance. Many purely musical pieces have been named \"waltz\" or \"minuet\", for example, while many concert dances have been produced that are based upon abstract musical pieces, such as \"2 and 3 Part Inventions, Adams Violin Concerto\" and \"Andantino\". Similarly, poems are often structured and named after dances or musical works, while dance and music have both drawn their conception of \"measure\" or \"metre\" from poetry.\nShawn quotes with approval the statement of Dalcroze that, while the art of musical rhythm consists in differentiating and combining time durations, pauses and accents \"according to physiological law\", that of \"plastic rhythm\" (i.e. dance) \"is to designate movement in space, to interpret long time-values by slow movements and short ones by quick movements, regulate pauses by their divers successions and express sound accentuations in their multiple nuances by additions of bodily weight, by means of muscular innervations\".\nShawn nevertheless points out that the system of musical time is a \"man-made, artificial thing... a manufactured tool, whereas rhythm is something that has always existed and depends on man not at all\", being \"the continuous flowing time which our human minds cut up into convenient units\", suggesting that music might be revivified by a return to the values and the time-perception of dancing.\nThe early-20th-century American dancer Helen Moller stated simply that \"it is rhythm and form more than harmony and color which, from the beginning, has bound music, poetry and dancing together in a union that is indissoluble.\"\nApproaches to dance.\nConcert dance.\nConcert dance, like opera, generally depends for its large-scale form upon a narrative dramatic structure. The movements and gestures of the choreography are primarily intended to mime the personality and aims of the characters and their part in the plot. Such theatrical requirements tend towards longer, freer movements than those usual in non-narrative dance styles. On the other hand, the \"ballet blanc\", developed in the 19th century, allows interludes of rhythmic dance that developed into entirely \"plotless\" ballets in the 20th century and that allowed fast, rhythmic dance-steps such as those of the \"petit allegro\". A well-known example is \"The Cygnets' Dance\" in act two of \"Swan Lake\".\nThe ballet developed out of courtly dramatic productions of 16th- and 17th-century France and Italy and for some time dancers performed dances developed from those familiar from the musical suite, all of which were defined by definite rhythms closely identified with each dance. These appeared as character dances in the era of romantic nationalism.\nBallet reached widespread vogue in the romantic era, accompanied by a larger orchestra and grander musical conceptions that did not lend themselves easily to rhythmic clarity and by dance that emphasised dramatic mime. A broader concept of rhythm was needed, that which Rudolf Laban terms the \"rhythm and shape\" of movement that communicates character, emotion and intention, while only certain scenes required the exact synchronisation of step and music essential to other dance styles, so that, to Laban, modern Europeans seemed totally unable to grasp the meaning of \"primitive rhythmic movements\", a situation that began to change in the 20th century with such productions as Igor Stravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\" with its new rhythmic language evoking primal feelings of a primitive past.\nIndian classical dance styles, like ballet, are often in dramatic form, so that there is a similar complementarity between narrative expression and \"pure\" dance. In this case, however, the two are separately defined, though not always separately performed. The rhythmic elements, which are abstract and technical, are known as \"nritta\". Both this and expressive dance \"(nritya)\", though, are closely tied to the rhythmic system (\"tala\"). Teachers have adapted the spoken rhythmic mnemonic system called \"bol\" to the needs of dancers.\nJapanese classical dance-theatre styles such as Kabuki and Noh, like Indian dance-drama, distinguish between narrative and abstract dance productions. The three main categories of kabuki are \"jidaimono\" (historical), \"sewamono\" (domestic) and \"shosagoto\" (dance pieces). Somewhat similarly, Noh distinguishes between \"Geki Noh\", based around the advancement of plot and the narration of action, and \"Fury\u016b Noh\", dance pieces involving acrobatics, stage properties, multiple characters and elaborate stage action.\nParticipatory and social dance.\nSocial dances, those intended for participation rather than for an audience, may include various forms of mime and narrative, but are typically set much more closely to the rhythmic pattern of music, so that terms like waltz and polka refer as much to musical pieces as to the dance itself. The rhythm of the dancers' feet may even form an essential part of the music, as in tap dance. African dance, for example, is rooted in fixed basic steps, but may also allow a high degree of rhythmic interpretation: the feet or the trunk mark the basic pulse while cross-rhythms are picked up by shoulders, knees, or head, with the best dancers simultaneously giving plastic expression to all the elements of the polyrhythmic pattern.\nCultural traditions.\nAfrica.\nDance in Africa is deeply integrated into society and major events in a community are frequently reflected in dances: dances are performed for births and funerals, weddings and wars. Traditional dances impart cultural morals, including religious traditions and sexual standards; give vent to repressed emotions, such as grief; motivate community members to cooperate, whether fighting wars or grinding grain; enact spiritual rituals; and contribute to social cohesiveness.\nThousands of dances are performed around the continent. These may be divided into traditional, neotraditional, and classical styles: folkloric dances of a particular society, dances created more recently in imitation of traditional styles, and dances transmitted more formally in schools or private lessons. African dance has been altered by many forces, such as European missionaries and colonialist governments, who often suppressed local dance traditions as licentious or distracting. Dance in contemporary African cultures still serves its traditional functions in new contexts; dance may celebrate the inauguration of a hospital, build community for rural migrants in unfamiliar cities, and be incorporated into Christian church ceremonies.\nAsia.\nAll Indian classical dances are to varying degrees rooted in the \"Natyashastra\" and therefore share common features: for example, the \"mudra\"s (hand positions), some body positions, leg movement and the inclusion of dramatic or expressive acting or abhinaya. Indian classical music provides accompaniment and dancers of nearly all the styles wear bells around their ankles to counterpoint and complement the percussion.\nThere are now many regional varieties of Indian classical dance. Dances like \"Odra Magadhi\", which after decades long debate, has been traced to present day Mithila, Odisha region's dance form of Odissi (Orissi), indicate influence of dances in cultural interactions between different regions.\nThe Punjab area overlapping India and Pakistan is the place of origin of Bhangra. It is widely known both as a style of music and a dance. It is mostly related to ancient harvest celebrations, love, patriotism or social issues. Its music is coordinated by a musical instrument called the 'Dhol'. Bhangra is not just music but a dance, a celebration of the harvest where people beat the dhol (drum), sing Boliyaan (lyrics) and dance. It developed further with the Vaisakhi festival of the Sikhs.\nThe dances of Sri Lanka include the devil dances (\"yakun natima\"), a carefully crafted ritual reaching far back into Sri Lanka's pre-Buddhist past that combines ancient \"Ayurvedic\" concepts of disease causation with psychological manipulation and combines many aspects including Sinhalese cosmology. Their influence can be seen on the classical dances of Sri Lanka.\nThe dances of the Middle East are usually the traditional forms of circle dancing which are modernized to an extent. They would include dabke, tamzara, Assyrian folk dance, Kurdish dance, Armenian dance and Turkish dance, among others. All these forms of dances would usually involve participants engaging each other by holding hands or arms (depending on the style of the dance). They would make rhythmic moves with their legs and shoulders as they curve around the dance floor. The head of the dance would generally hold a cane or handkerchief.\nEurope and North America.\nFolk dances vary across Europe and may date back hundreds or thousands of years, but many have features in common such as group participation led by a caller, hand-holding or arm-linking between participants, and fixed musical forms known as caroles. Some, such as the maypole dance are common to many nations, while others such as the c\u00e9ilidh and the polka are deeply-rooted in a single culture. Some European folk dances such as the square dance were brought to the New World and subsequently became part of American culture.\nBallet developed first in Italy and then in France from lavish court spectacles that combined music, drama, poetry, song, costumes and dance. Members of the court nobility took part as performers. During the reign of Louis XIV, himself a dancer, dance became more codified. Professional dancers began to take the place of court amateurs, and ballet masters were licensed by the French government. The first ballet dance academy was the Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Danse (Royal Dance Academy), opened in Paris in 1661. Shortly thereafter, the first institutionalized ballet troupe, associated with the Academy, was formed; this troupe began as an all-male ensemble but by 1681 opened to include women as well.\n20th century concert dance brought an explosion of innovation in dance style characterized by an exploration of freer technique. Early pioneers of what became known as modern dance include Loie Fuller, Isadora Duncan, Mary Wigman and Ruth St. Denis. The relationship of music to dance serves as the basis for Eurhythmics, devised by Emile Jaques-Dalcroze, which was influential to the development of Modern dance and modern ballet through artists such as Marie Rambert. Eurythmy, developed by Rudolf Steiner and Marie Steiner-von Sivers, combines formal elements reminiscent of traditional dance with the new freer style, and introduced a complex new vocabulary to dance. In the 1920s, important founders of the new style such as Martha Graham and Doris Humphrey began their work. Since this time, a wide variety of dance styles have been developed; see Modern dance.\nAfrican American dance developed in everyday spaces, rather than in dance studios, schools or companies. Tap dance, disco, jazz dance, swing dance, hip hop dance, the lindy hop with its relationship to rock and roll music and rock and roll dance have had a global influence. Dance styles fusing classical ballet technique with African-American dance have also appeared in the 21st century, including Hiplet.\nLatin America.\nDance is central to Latin American social life and culture. Brazilian Samba, Argentinian tango, and Cuban salsa are internationally popular partner dances, and other national dances\u2014merengue, cueca, plena, jarabe, joropo, marinera, cumbia, bachata and others\u2014are important components of their respective countries' cultures. Traditional Carnival festivals incorporate these and other dances in enormous celebrations.\nDance has played an important role in forging a collective identity among the many cultural and ethnic groups of Latin America. Dance served to unite the many African, European, and indigenous peoples of the region. Certain dance genres, such as capoeira, and body movements, especially the characteristic \"quebradas\" or pelvis swings, have been variously banned and celebrated throughout Latin American history.\nUnited States.\nHip hop originated in New York, specifically in the area known as the Bronx. It was created for those who struggled in society and didn't seem to have a voice in the community that surrounded them because of their lack of wealth. It helped those in the same situation come together and speak about difficult topics by using movement and feeling.\nDance education.\nDance studies are offered through the arts and humanities programs of many higher education institutions. Some universities offer Bachelor of Arts and higher academic degrees in Dance. A dance study curriculum may encompass a diverse range of courses and topics, including dance practice and performance, choreography, ethnochoreology, kinesiology, dance notation, and dance therapy. Most recently, dance and movement therapy has been integrated in some schools into math lessons for students with learning disabilities, emotional/behavioral disabilities and/or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).\nOccupations.\nProfessional dancers.\nProfessional dancers are usually employed on contract or for particular performances or productions. The professional life of a dancer is generally one of constantly changing work situations, strong competitive pressure and low pay. Consequently, professional dancers often must supplement their incomes to achieve financial stability. In the U.S. many professional dancers belong to unions (such as the American Guild of Musical Artists, Screen Actors Guild and Actors' Equity Association) that establish working conditions and minimum salaries for their members. Professional dancers must possess large amounts of athleticism. To lead a successful career, it is advantageous to be versatile in many styles of dance, have a strong technical background and to utilize other forms of physical training to remain fit and healthy.\nDance teachers.\nDance teachers typically focus on teaching dance performance, or coaching competitive dancers, or both. They typically have performance experience in the types of dance they teach or coach. For example, dancesport teachers and coaches are often tournament dancers or former dancesport performers. Dance teachers may be self-employed, or employed by dance schools or general education institutions with dance programs. Some work for university programs or other schools that are associated with professional classical dance (e.g., ballet) or modern dance companies. Others are employed by smaller, privately owned dance schools that offer dance training and performance coaching for various types of dance.\nChoreographers.\nChoreographers are the ones that design the dancing movements within a dance, they are often university trained and are typically employed for particular projects or, more rarely may work on contract as the resident choreographer for a specific dance company.\nCompetitions.\nA dance competition is an organized event in which contestants perform dances before a judge or judges for awards, and in some cases, monetary prizes. There are several major types of dance competitions, distinguished primarily by the style or styles of dances performed. Major types of dance competitions include:\nIn addition, there are numerous dance competitions shows presented on television and other mass media."}
{"id": "7886", "revid": "20419951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7886", "title": "Drew Barrymore", "text": "Drew Blythe Barrymore (born February 22, 1975) is an American actress, producer, director, talk show host and entrepreneur, who is the recipient of numerous accolades, including a Golden Globe, a Screen Actors Guild Award, and a BAFTA nomination. She is a member of the Barrymore family of actors, and the granddaughter of John Barrymore.\nBarrymore achieved fame as a child actress with her role in \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982). Following a highly publicized childhood marked by drug and alcohol abuse, she released an autobiography, \"Little Girl Lost\", 1991 at the age of 16. She went on to appear in a string of successful films throughout the decade, including \"Poison Ivy\" (1992), \"Boys on the Side\" (1995), \"Mad Love\" (1995), \"Batman Forever\" (1995), \"Scream\" (1996), and \"Ever After\" (1998). Barrymore collaborated with Adam Sandler on three films, \"The Wedding Singer\" (1998), \"50 First Dates\" (2004) and \"Blended\" (2014).\nBarrymore's other films include \"Never Been Kissed\" (1999), \"Charlie's Angels\" (2000), \"Donnie Darko\" (2001), \"Riding in Cars with Boys\" (2001), \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\" (2002), \"\" (2003), \"Fever Pitch\" (2005), \"Music and Lyrics\" (2007), \"Going the Distance\" (2010), \"Big Miracle\" (2012) and \"Miss You Already\" (2015). Barrymore made her directorial debut film \"Whip It\" (2009), in which she also starred. She received a SAG Award and a Golden Globe for her performance in \"Grey Gardens\" (2009). She starred in the Netflix series, \"Santa Clarita Diet\". Since September 2020, Barrymore has hosted \"The Drew Barrymore Show\", a syndicated talk show.\nIn 1995, Barrymore and Nancy Juvonen formed the production company Flower Films. They have produced several projects in which Barrymore has starred. In 2013, Barrymore launched a range of cosmetics under the Flower banner, which has grown to include lines in makeup, perfume and eyewear. Her other business ventures include a range of wines and a clothing line. In 2015, Dutton published a collection of Barrymore's autobiographical essays in a book titled \"Wildflower\". Barrymore received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004.\nEarly life.\nAncestry.\nDrew Blythe Barrymore was born in Culver City, California, to American actor John Drew Barrymore and aspiring actress Jaid Barrymore (born Ildik\u00f3 Jaid Mak\u00f3), who was born in a displaced persons camp in Brannenburg, West Germany, to Hungarian World War II refugees. Barrymore is one of four children and has a half-brother, John, who is also an actor. Her parents divorced in 1984, when she was nine years old.\nBarrymore was born into an acting family. All of her paternal great-grandparents\u2014Maurice and Georgie Drew Barrymore, Maurice and Mae Costello ( Altschuk)\u2014as well as her paternal grandparents, John Barrymore and Dolores Costello, were actors, with John being arguably the most acclaimed actor of his generation. Barrymore is a niece of Diana Barrymore, a grandniece of Lionel Barrymore, Ethel Barrymore, and Helene Costello, and a great-great-granddaughter of Irish-born John and English-born Louisa Lane Drew, all of whom were also actors. She is a great-grandniece of Broadway idol John Drew Jr. and silent film actor, writer, and director Sidney Drew.\nBarrymore's godmothers are actress Sophia Loren and Lee Strasberg's widow, Anna Strasberg; Barrymore described her relationship with the latter as one that \"would become so important to me as a kid because she was so kind and nurturing.\" Her godfather is director Steven Spielberg.\nBarrymore's first name, Drew, was the maiden name of her paternal great-grandmother Georgie Drew, and her middle name, Blythe, was the surname of the family first used by her great-grandfather Maurice Barrymore. In her 1991 autobiography \"Little Girl Lost\", Barrymore recounted early memories of her abusive father, who left the family when Barrymore was six months old. She and her father never had anything resembling a significant relationship and seldom spoke to each other.\nChildhood.\nBarrymore grew up on Poinsettia Place in West Hollywood until the age of 7, when she moved to Sherman Oaks. In her 2015 memoir, \"Wildflower\", she says she talks \"like a valley girl\" because she grew up in Sherman Oaks. She moved back to West Hollywood upon becoming emancipated at 14. Barrymore attended elementary school at Fountain Day School in West Hollywood and Country School.\nIn the wake of her sudden stardom, Barrymore endured a notoriously troubled childhood. She was a regular at the racy Studio 54 as a young girl, and her nightlife and constant partying became a popular subject with the media. She was placed in rehab at the age of 13, and spent 18 months in an institution for the mentally ill. A suicide attempt at 14 put her back in rehab, followed by a three-month stay with singer David Crosby and his wife. The stay was precipitated, Crosby said, because she \"needed to be around some people that were committed to sobriety.\" Barrymore later described this period of her life in her autobiography, \"Little Girl Lost.\" After a successful juvenile court petition for emancipation, she moved into her own apartment at the age of 15.\nCareer.\n1980s.\nBarrymore's professional career began at eleven months, when she auditioned for a dog food commercial. She was nipped by her canine co-star, to which she merely laughed and was hired for the job. After her film debut with a small role in \"Altered States\" (1980), she played Gertie in \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982). Spielberg felt that she had the right imagination for her role after she impressed him with a story that she led a punk rock band. \"E.T.\" is the highest-grossing film of the 1980s and made her one of the most famous child actors of the time. Barrymore won a Young Artist Award for Best Supporting Actress.\nIn the 1984 horror film adaptation of Stephen King's 1980 novel \"Firestarter,\" Barrymore played a girl with pyrokinesis who becomes the target of a secret government agency known as The Shop. The same year, she played a young girl divorcing her famous parents in \"Irreconcilable Differences\", for which she was nominated for her first Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress. In a review in the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", Roger Ebert stated, \"Barrymore is the right actress for this role precisely because she approaches it with such grave calm.\"\nBarrymore endured a troubled youth and continued to act intermittently during the decade. She starred in the 1985 anthology horror film \"Cat's Eye,\" also written by King. The film received positive reviews and Barrymore was nominated for a Young Artist Award for Best Leading Young Actress. She starred in the 1989 romantic comedy film \"See You in the Morning.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" criticized the \"fashionable phoniness\" of the film, but positively singled out Barrymore for her performance. After her twelve-day rehab treatment at ASAP, Barrymore starred in \"Far from Home\" (1989) as a teenager who gets stranded with her father in the small town in a remote part of the desert. The film went largely unnoticed by audiences and received negative reviews from critics, who dismissed the sexual portrayal of her role.\n1990s.\nIn the early 1990s, Barrymore's rebelliousness played itself out on screen and in print. She forged an image as a manipulative teenage seductress, beginning with \"Poison Ivy\" (1992), which was a box office failure, but was popular on video and cable. Her character \"Ivy\" was ranked at #6 on the list of the top 26 \"bad girls\" of all time by \"Entertainment Weekly\". In 1992, Barrymore was 17 when she posed nude with her then-fianc\u00e9, actor Jamie Walters, for the cover of the July issue of \"Interview\" magazine; she also appeared nude in pictures inside the issue.\nIn the 1992 crime film \"Guncrazy\", Barrymore played a teenager who kills her sexually abusive stepfather after he teaches her how to use a gun. \"Variety\" remarked that she \"pulls off impressively\" her character, and Barrymore was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for her performance. In 1993, she took on the role of the younger sister of a murdered ballerina in \"No Place to Hide\" and starred as a writer followed by what is apparently her evil twin in \"Doppelganger\". Both thrillers were panned by critics and failed to find an audience. She appeared in the Western comedy \"Bad Girls\" (1994), which follows four former prostitutes on the run following a justifiable homicide and prison escape. Roger Ebert, in his review for the film, wrote for \"Chicago Sun-Times\": \"What a good idea, to make a Western about four tough women. And what a sad movie.\"\nWhen Barrymore was 19, she posed nude for the January 1995 issue of \"Playboy\". Director Steven Spielberg, who is also her godfather, gave her a quilt for her 20th birthday with a note that read, \"Cover yourself up.\" Enclosed were copies of her \"Playboy\" pictures; the pictures had been altered by his art department so that she appeared fully clothed.\nDuring her appearance on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\" in 1995, Barrymore climbed onto David Letterman's desk, flashed her breasts to him and gave him a kiss on the cheek as a birthday present. She modeled in a series of Guess? jeans ads during this time.\nIn \"Boys on the Side\" (1995), Barrymore played a pregnant girl who wants to escape from her abusive boyfriend. The film went little-seen in theaters but was positively received by critics. In the same year, she briefly appeared in Joel Schumacher's film \"Batman Forever\", as Sugar, a moll to Two-Face (Tommy Lee Jones). In 1996, she made a brief but notable appearance in Wes Craven's slasher \"Scream\". Barrymore read the film's script and was interested in being involved, approaching the production team herself to request a role. The producers were quick to take advantage of her unexpected interest, and signed her to play the lead role of Sidney Prescott, but when she was faced with unexpected commitments, she instead played the smaller role of Casey Becker and the lead role was given to \"Party of Five\" star Neve Campbell. \"Scream\" was released to critical acclaim and made $173 million worldwide. By the mid- and late 1990s, Barrymore re-established her image and continued to be a highly bankable star.\nIn \"The Wedding Singer\" (1998), Barrymore played Julia Sullivan, the love interest of Robbie Hart (Adam Sandler). \"Variety\" found the film to be a \"spirited, funny and warm saga\" that serves them up \"in a new way that enhances their most winning qualities\". Budgeted at $18 million, the film grossed $123.3 million internationally. Barrymore starred in two other 1998 film releases, \"Home Fries\" and \"Ever After\". \"Home Fries\" saw her play a pregnant woman unknowingly falling for the stepson of the deceased father of her baby. In the romantic drama \"Ever After\", inspired by the fairy tale Cinderella, she took on the leading role; the film, which made $98 million globally, served as a reminder, according to Roger Ebert, of how well \"she can hold the screen and involve us in her characters\".\nBarrymore voiced the title role of an anthropomorphic Jack Russell terrier in the television Christmas special \"Olive, the Other Reindeer\", for which she was nominated for a Primetime Emmy. After establishing Flower Films, Barrymore and Nancy Juvonen produced the company's first film, \"Never Been Kissed\" (1999), in which Barrymore played an insecure copy editor for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" enrolling in high school as part of assigned research. While reviews from critics were mixed, \"CNN\" noted: \"There are two words which describe why this film works: Drew Barrymore. Her comedic timing and willingness to go all out in her quest for a laugh combine to make \"Never Been Kissed\" a gratifying movie-going experience\". The film was a commercial success, grossing $84.5 million.\n2000s.\nIn \"Charlie's Angels\" (2000), Barrymore, Cameron Diaz and Lucy Liu played the trio of investigators in Los Angeles. The film was a major box office success and helped solidify the standing between Barrymore and the company. Barrymore starred in \"Riding in Cars with Boys\" (2001), as a teenage mother in a failed marriage with the drug-addicted father (based on Beverly Donofrio's real-life story). When the production of Richard Kelly's \"Donnie Darko\" was threatened, Barrymore stepped forward with financing from the company, and played the title character's English teacher. Although the film was less than successful at the box office in the wake of 9/11, it reached cult status after the DVD release, inspiring numerous websites devoted to unraveling the plot twists and meanings.\nIn 2002, Barrymore starred with Sam Rockwell and Julia Roberts in George Clooney's directorial debut \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\", based on the autobiography of television producer Chuck Barris. In 2003, she reprised her role as Dylan Sanders in \"\", and starred with Ben Stiller in \"Duplex\". Flower Films and Happy Madison Productions produced \"50 First Dates\" (2004), in which Barrymore took on the role of a woman with short-term memory loss, and who is the love interest of a marine veterinarian (Sandler). Summing up Barrymore's appeal, Roger Ebert, in his review for the film, remarked that Barrymore displayed a \"smiling, coy sincerity\", in what he described as an \"ingratiating and lovable\" film. \"50 First Dates\" was a commercial success; it made US$120.9 million in North America and US$196.4 million worldwide.\nIn the American adaptation of the 1997 eponymous British remake \"Fever Pitch\" (2005), Barrymore played the love interest of an immature school teacher (Jimmy Fallon). The film grossed a modest US$50 million worldwide and had generally favourable reviews by critics who felt it \"has enough charm and on-screen chemistry between [Fallon and Barrymore] to make it a solid hit\". She and Hugh Grant starred in \"Music and Lyrics\", which focuses on the relationship that evolves between a former pop music idol and an aspiring writer as they struggle to compose a song for a reigning pop diva. The romantic comedy, released in February 2007, received largely positive reviews, with \"The Washington Post\" finding the two to be \"great together\" in it. The film was a commercial success, grossing US$145 million globally.\nBarrymore starred in Curtis Hanson's little-seen poker-themed film \"Lucky You\" later in 2007, as an aspiring singer and the subject of the affections of a talented poker player, and also reunited with \"Never Been Kissed\" director Raja Gosnell for the commercial hit \"Beverly Hills Chihuahua\" (2008), in which she voiced the titular character, a richly pampered pet who gets dognapped in Mexico and has to escape from an evil Doberman.\nIn 2009, Barrymore starred in the ensemble comedy \"He's Just Not That Into You\", which received mixed reviews, partly due to her limited time on screen, while it grossed US$178 million worldwide. She played the lead role of Edith Bouvier Beale, the daughter of Edith Ewing Bouvier Beale (Jessica Lange), in the HBO film \"Grey Gardens\", directed by Michael Sucsy and based on the 1975 documentary of the same name. The television film was a huge success, winning five Primetime Emmy Awards and two Golden Globe Awards. \"Rolling Stone\" writer Peter Travels found Barrymore to be a \"revelation\" in her role. Barrymore received a nomination for the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie. She won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Miniseries or Television Film and won the Screen Actors Guild for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Television Movie or Miniseries award.\nBarrymore made her directorial debut with the sports dramedy \"Whip It\" (2009); she also starred opposite Elliot Page and Marcia Gay Harden in the film, about a high-schooler (Page) who ditches the teen beauty pageant scene so she participate in an Austin roller derby league. Barrymore worked with screenwriter Shauna Cross for months on script revisions, with Barrymore pushing her to \"avoid her story's tidier prospects, to make things 'more raw and open ended.'\" While the film found limited box office receipts, it was favorably received; according to review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, critics agreed that her \"directorial debut has enough charm, energy, and good-natured humor to transcend its many cliches\". For her venture, Barrymore garnered nominations for a Bronze Horse at the Stockholm Film Festival and for the EDA Female Focus Award at the 2009 Alliance of Women Film Journalists. In \"Everybody's Fine\", her last 2009 film release, Barrymore played the daughter of a recently widowed retiree (Robert De Niro). The drama flopped at the box office, but Stephen Holden for \"The New York Times\" considered Barrymore \"as ingenuous as ever\" in what he described as a \"small role\".\n2010s.\nIn 2010, Barrymore starred with Justin Long in Nanette Burstein's \"Going the Distance\". The film follows a couple dealing the ups and downs of a long-distance relationship, while commuting between New York City and San Francisco. It garnered generally mixed reviews by critics, who summed it as \"timelier and a little more honest than most romantic comedies\", and budgeted at US$32 million, the film made US$40 million at the worldwide box office.\nOn August 2, 2011, Barrymore directed the music video for the song \"Our Deal,\" for the band Best Coast, which features Chlo\u00eb Grace Moretz, Miranda Cosgrove, Tyler Posey, Donald Glover, Shailene Woodley and Alia Shawkat. Barrymore starred with John Krasinski in the drama \"Big Miracle\" (2012), which covers Operation Breakthrough, the 1988 international effort to rescue gray whales from being trapped in ice near Point Barrow, Alaska. The film saw her play Rachel Krameron, based on Greenpeace activist Cindy Lowry. Despite a positive critical reception, the film flopped at the box office.\nIn \"Blended\" (2014), Barrymore played Lauren Reynolds, a recently divorced woman ending up on a family resort with Jim Friedman (Sandler). Film critic James Berardinelli dismissed the \"hit-and-miss humor\" of the story and wrote that \"as [Sandler and Barrymore] are concerned, the third time is definitely not the charm\", as part of an overall lukewarm critical response. The film, however, ultimately grossed US$128 million worldwide. She and Toni Collette starred in \"Miss You Already\" (2015), as two long-time friends whose relationship is put to the test when one starts a family and the other becomes ill. Reviewers embraced the film, while it received a limited theatrical release.\nFrom 2017 to 2019, Barrymore starred in the Netflix television series \"Santa Clarita Diet\", portraying a real estate agent who, after experiencing a physical transformation into a zombie, starts craving human flesh. Along with co-star Timothy Olyphant, Barrymore also served as an executive producer on the single-camera series, which was favorably received upon its premiere; \"Rolling Stone\" felt that \"much of [the series' laughs] comes down to the uncrushable Drew Barrymore charm\" and furthermore remarked: \"The show is a welcome comeback for Barrymore, the eternally beloved grunge-era wild thing\u2014it's not just her big move into TV, but her first high-profile performance anywhere in years. In a way, it circles back to the roles she was doing in the early [90s], playing deadly vixens in flicks like \"Guncrazy\" or \"Doppelganger\"\".\n2020s.\nBarrymore starred in Jamie Babbit's film \"The Stand In\". It was set to premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival in April 2020, but was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On September 14, 2020, Barrymore premiered a syndicated daytime talk show, \"The Drew Barrymore Show\". In March 2021, Barrymore said she had taken an indefinite hiatus from acting.\nImage and fashion.\nBarrymore became a CoverGirl Cosmetics' model and spokeswoman in 2007. In February 2015, she remained one of the faces of CoverGirl, alongside Queen Latifah and Taylor Swift. The company partnered with her because \"she emulates the iconic image of CoverGirl with her fresh, natural beauty and energetic yet authentic spirit,\" said Esi Eggleston Bracey, vice president and general manager of CoverGirl Cosmetics North America. She brought not only her personality into this endorsement but also her creative side, as she also helped create the ads. She was No. 1 in \"People\"'s annual 100 Most Beautiful People list in 2007. Later, she was named the new face for the Gucci jewelry line. As a model, Barrymore signed a contract with IMG Models New York City. She also was a spokeswoman for Crocs.\nBarrymore launched a women's fashion line in fall 2017 in conjunction with Amazon.com called Dear Drew, which featured a pop-up shop in New York City that opened in November.\nIn May 2007, Barrymore was named Ambassador Against Hunger for the United Nations World Food Programme and later donated $1\u00a0million to the cause. As a guest photographer for a magazine series called \"They Shoot New York\", she appeared on the cover holding a Pentax K1000 film camera. She expressed hopes of exposing her work in a gallery one day, as she had documented the most recent decade of her life with a Pentax camera.\nPersonal life.\nWhen she was 16 in 1991, Barrymore became engaged to Leland Hayward, namesake and grandson of Hollywood producer Leland Hayward. The engagement was called off a few months later. Barrymore was engaged to and lived with musician and actor Jamie Walters from 1992 to 1993.\nBarrymore married her first husband, Welsh-born Los Angeles bar owner Jeremy Thomas, on March 20, 1994. She filed for divorce from him less than two months later.\nIn late 1994, Barrymore began dating Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson, followed by MTV host and comedian Tom Green in 1999; she and Green were engaged in July 2000 and married a year later. Together, they starred in \"Charlie's Angels\" and Green's directorial film debut, \"Freddy Got Fingered\". Green filed for divorce in December 2001, which was finalized on October 15, 2002.\nIn 2002, Barrymore began dating The Strokes drummer Fabrizio Moretti shortly after they met at a concert. Their relationship ended in January 2007. She began dating Justin Long, but they broke up in July 2008. Barrymore and Long reunited while filming \"Going the Distance\" in 2009, before breaking up again the following year.\"\"\nIn early 2011, Barrymore began dating art consultant Will Kopelman, the son of former Chanel CEO Arie Kopelman. The couple announced their engagement in January 2012, and married on June 2, 2012, in Montecito, California. Four days later, the couple's wedding image appeared on the cover of \"People\" magazine. Barrymore and Kopelman have two daughters: Olive born in 2012 and Frankie in 2014. On April 2, 2016, Barrymore and Kopelman released a statement confirming they had separated and intended to divorce. On July 15, 2016, Barrymore officially filed for divorce, which was finalized on August 3, 2016.\nIn an interview with \"Contactmusic.com\" in 2003, Barrymore said that she had always considered herself bisexual, as she said: \"I love a woman's body. I think a woman and a woman together are beautiful, just as a man and a woman together are beautiful. Being with a woman is like exploring your own body, but through someone else\".\nBarrymore is the godmother of Frances Bean Cobain, the daughter of Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love.\nBarrymore eats a plant-based diet.\nAwards, honors and nominations.\nIn 1999, Barrymore was honored by the Young Artist Foundation with its Former Child Star \"Lifetime Achievement\" Award commemorating her outstanding achievements within the film industry as a child actress. For her contributions to the film industry, Barrymore received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004. Her star is located at 6925 Hollywood Boulevard.\nBarrymore's films compiled a worldwide box office gross that stood at over US$2.3\u00a0billion. According to \"The Hollywood Reporter\"s annual Star Salary Top 10, she was tied for eighth place on the top ten list of actresses' salaries, commanding 10 to 12 million dollars per film for 2006. Barrymore became the youngest person to have hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" having hosted on November 20, 1982, at 7 years of age, a record that still remains unbroken . On February 3, 2007, Barrymore hosted \"SNL\" for the fifth time, making her the second female host (after Candice Bergen) in the show's history to do so. She hosted again on October 10, 2009, becoming the first female to host six times."}
{"id": "7888", "revid": "6484069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7888", "title": "D. W. Griffith", "text": "David Wark Griffith (January 22, 1875 \u2013 July 23, 1948) was an American film director. Widely considered as the most important filmmaker of his generation, he pioneered financing of the feature-length movie.\nHis film \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915) made investors a profit, but also attracted much controversy, as it depicted African Americans in a negative light and glorified the Ku Klux Klan. \"Intolerance\" (1916) was made as an answer to his critics, but not as an apology for the negative images of African Americans in film. Several of Griffith's later films were also successful, including \"Broken Blossoms\" (1919), \"Way Down East\" (1920), and \"Orphans of the Storm\" (1921), but the high costs he incurred for production and promotion often led to commercial failure. He had made roughly 500 films by the time of his final feature, \"The Struggle\" (1931).\nTogether with Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, and Douglas Fairbanks he founded United Artists, enabling them to control their own interests, rather than depending on commercial studios.\nEarly life.\nGriffith was born January 22, 1875, on a farm in Oldham County, Kentucky, the son of Jacob Wark \"Roaring Jake\" Griffith, a Confederate Army colonel in the American Civil War who was elected as a Kentucky state legislator, and Mary Perkins (n\u00e9e Oglesby). Griffith was raised as a Methodist, and he attended a one-room schoolhouse, where he was taught by his older sister Mattie. His father died when he was 10, and the family struggled with poverty.\nWhen Griffith was 14, his mother abandoned the farm and moved the family to Louisville, Kentucky; there she opened a boarding house, which failed shortly afterward. Griffith then left high school to help support the family, taking a job in a dry goods store and later in a bookstore. He began his creative career as an actor in touring companies. Meanwhile, he was learning how to become a playwright, but had little success\u2014only one of his plays was accepted for a performance. He traveled to New York City in 1907 in an attempt to sell a script to Edison Studios producer Edwin Porter; however, Porter rejected the script, but gave him an acting part in \"Rescued from an Eagle's Nest\" instead. He then decided to become an actor and appeared in many films as an extra.\nFilm career.\nIn 1908, Griffith accepted a role as a stage extra in \"Professional Jealousy\" for the American Mutoscope and Biograph Company, where he met cameraman Billy Bitzer, and his career in the film industry changed forever. In 1908, Biograph's main director Wallace McCutcheon Sr. grew ill, and his son Wallace McCutcheon Jr. took his place. McCutcheon Jr. did not bring the studio success; Biograph co-founder Harry Marvin gave Griffith the position, and he made the short \"The Adventures of Dollie\". He directed a total of 48 shorts for the company that year.\nAmong the films he directed in 1909 was \"The Cricket on the Hearth\", an adaptation of Charles Dickens\u2019 novel. On the influence of Dickens on his own film narrative, Griffith employed the technique of cross-cutting\u2014where two stories run alongside each other, as seen in Dickens\u2019 novels such as \"Oliver Twist\". When criticized by a cameraman for doing this in a later film, Griffith was said to have replied, \"Well, doesn't Dickens write that way?\".\nHis short \"In Old California\" (1910) was the first film shot in Hollywood, California. Four years later, he produced and directed his first feature film \"Judith of Bethulia\" (1914), one of the earlier to be produced in the U.S. Biograph believed that longer features were not viable at this point. According to Lillian Gish, the company thought that \"a movie that long would hurt [the audience's] eyes\".\nGriffith left Biograph because of company resistance to his goals and his cost overruns on the film. He took his company of actors with him and joined the Mutual Film Corporation. There he co-produced \"The Life of General Villa\", a biographical-action movie starring Pancho Villa as himself, shot on location in Mexico during a civil war. He formed a studio with Majestic Studios manager Harry Aitken, which became known as Reliance-Majestic Studios and later was renamed Fine Arts Studios. His new production company became an autonomous production unit partner in the Triangle Film Corporation along with Thomas H. Ince and Keystone Studios' Mack Sennett. The Triangle Film Corporation was headed by Aitken, who was released from the Mutual Film Corporation, and his brother Roy.\nGriffith directed and produced \"The Clansman\" through Reliance-Majestic Studios in 1915, which became known as \"The Birth of a Nation\" and is considered one of the early feature length American films. The film was a success, but it aroused much controversy due to its depiction of slavery, the Ku Klux Klan and race relations in the American Civil War and the reconstruction era of the United States. It was based on Thomas Dixon Jr.'s 1905 novel \"The Clansman: A Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan\"; it depicts Southern slavery as benign, the enfranchisement of freedmen as a corrupt plot by the Republican Party, and the Ku Klux Klan as a band of heroes restoring the rightful order. This view of the era was popular at the time and was endorsed for decades by historians of the Dunning School, although it met with strong criticism from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and other groups.\nThe NAACP attempted to stop showings of the film. This was successful in some cities, but nonetheless it was shown widely and became the most successful box-office attraction of its time. It is considered among the first \"blockbuster\" motion pictures, and broke all box office records that had been established until then. \"They lost track of the money it made\", Lillian Gish remarked in a Kevin Brownlow interview.\nAudiences in some major northern cities rioted over the film's racial content, which was filled with action and violence. Griffith's indignation at efforts to censor or ban the film motivated him to produce \"Intolerance\" the following year, in which he portrayed the effects of intolerance in four different historical periods: the Fall of Babylon; the Crucifixion of Jesus; the events surrounding the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre (during religious persecution of French Huguenots); and a modern story. \"Intolerance\" was not a financial success; it did not bring in enough profits to cover the lavish road show that accompanied it. Griffith put a huge budget into the film's production that could not be recovered in its box office. He mostly financed \"Intolerance\" himself, contributing to his financial ruin for the rest of his life.\nGriffith's production partnership was dissolved in 1917, and he went to Artcraft, part of Paramount Pictures, and then to First National Pictures (1919\u20131920). At the same time, he founded United Artists together with Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks; the studio was premised on allowing actors to control their own interests rather than being dependent upon commercial studios.\nHe continued to make films, but never achieved box-office grosses again as high as either \"The Birth of a Nation\" or \"Intolerance.\"\nLater film career.\nThough United Artists survived as a company, Griffith's association with it was short-lived. While some of his later films did well at the box office, commercial success often eluded him. Griffith features from this period include \"Broken Blossoms\" (1919), \"Way Down East\" (1920), \"Orphans of the Storm\" (1921), \"Dream Street\" (1921), \"One Exciting Night\" (1922) and \"America\" (1924). Of these, the first three were successes at the box office. Griffith was forced to leave United Artists after \"Isn't Life Wonderful\" (1924) failed at the box office.\nHe made a part-talkie, \"Lady of the Pavements\" (1929), and only two full-sound films: \"Abraham Lincoln\" (1930) and \"The Struggle\" (1931). Neither was successful, and after \"The Struggle\" he never made another film.\nIn 1936, director Woody Van Dyke, who had worked as Griffith's apprentice on \"Intolerance\", asked Griffith to help him shoot the famous earthquake sequence for \"San Francisco\", but did not give him any film credit. Starring Clark Gable, Jeanette MacDonald and Spencer Tracy, it was the top-grossing film of the year.\nIn 1939, the producer Hal Roach hired Griffith to produce \"Of Mice and Men\" (1939) and \"One Million B.C.\" (1940). He wrote to Griffith: \"I need help from the production side to select the proper writers, cast, et cetera, and to help me generally in the supervision of these pictures.\"\nAlthough Griffith eventually disagreed with Roach over the production and parted, Roach later insisted that some of the scenes in the completed film were directed by Griffith. This would make the film the final production in which Griffith was actively involved. However, cast members' accounts recall Griffith directing only the screen tests and costume tests. When Roach advertised the film in late 1939 with Griffith listed as producer, the latter asked that his name be removed.\nAlthough mostly forgotten by movie-goers of the time Griffith was held in awe by many in the film industry. In the mid-1930s he was given a special Oscar by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. In 1946 he made an impromptu visit to the film location of David O. Selznick's epic western \"Duel in the Sun\", where some of his veteran actors, Lillian Gish, Lionel Barrymore and Harry Carey, were cast members. Gish and Barrymore found their old mentor's presence distracting and became self-conscious; in response, Griffith hid behind the scenery when the two were filming their scenes.\nDeath.\nOn the morning of July 23, 1948, Griffith was discovered unconscious in the lobby at the Knickerbocker Hotel in Los Angeles, where he had been living alone. He died of a cerebral hemorrhage at 3:42 PM on the way to a Hollywood hospital. A public memorial service was held in his honor at the Hollywood Masonic Temple, but few stars came to pay their last respects. He is buried at Mount Tabor Methodist Church Graveyard in Centerfield, Kentucky. In 1950, The Directors Guild of America provided a stone and bronze monument for his grave site.\nLegacy.\nPerformer and director Charlie Chaplin called Griffith \"The Teacher of Us All\". Filmmakers such as Alfred Hitchcock, Lev Kuleshov, Jean Renoir, Cecil B. DeMille, King Vidor, Victor Fleming, Raoul Walsh, Carl Theodor Dreyer, Sergei Eisenstein, and Stanley Kubrick have praised Griffith.\nGriffith seems to have been the first to understand how certain film techniques could be used to create an expressive language; it gained popular recognition with the release of his \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915). His early shorts \u2014such as Biograph's \"The Musketeers of Pig Alley\" (1912), show that Griffith's attention to camera placement and lighting heightened mood and tension. In making \"Intolerance\" Griffith opened up new possibilities for the medium, creating a form that seems to owe more to music than to traditional narrative.\nA large part of Griffith's legacy is that he perpetuated racist stereotypes and opened the gateway to prejudice in mainstream Hollywood film. Refusing to apologize for the messages in his movies, he helped enable a resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1910s and 1920s, enabling the onset of violence against black people and minorities in the United States. The \"Lost Cause\" post-Civil War narrative fabricated by Confederate politicians and high-ranking military was considered to be factual history after audiences saw it on the big silver screen.\nFilm preservation.\nGriffith has six films preserved on the United States National Film Registry deemed as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". These are \"Lady Helen's Escapade\" (1909), \"A Corner in Wheat\" (1909), \"The Musketeers of Pig Alley\" (1912), \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915), \"Intolerance\" (1916) and \"Broken Blossoms\" (1919)."}
{"id": "7889", "revid": "27632231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7889", "title": "Direct realism", "text": ""}
{"id": "7890", "revid": "1526960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7890", "title": "Dune", "text": "A dune is a landform composed of wind- or water-driven sand. It typically takes the form of a mound, ridge, or hill. An area with dunes is called a dune system or a dune complex. A large dune complex is called a dune field, while broad, flat regions covered with wind-swept sand or dunes with little or no vegetation are called \"ergs\" or \"sand seas\". Dunes occur in different shapes and sizes, but most kinds of dunes are longer on the stoss (upflow) side, where the sand is pushed up the dune, and have a shorter \"slip face\" in the lee side. The valley or trough between dunes is called a \"dune slack\".\nDunes are most common in desert environments, where the lack of moisture hinders the growth of vegetation that would otherwise interfere with the development of dunes. However, sand deposits are not restricted to deserts, and dunes are also found along sea shores, along streams in semiarid climates, in areas of glacial outwash, and in other areas where poorly cemented sandstone bedrock disintegrates to produce an ample supply of loose sand. Subaqueous dunes can form from the action of water flow (fluvial processes) on sand or gravel beds of rivers, estuaries, and the sea-bed.\nSome coastal areas have one or more sets of dunes running parallel to the shoreline directly inland from the beach. In most cases, the dunes are important in protecting the land against potential ravages by storm waves from the sea. Artificial dunes are sometimes constructed to protect coastal areas. The dynamic action of wind and water can sometimes cause dunes to drift, which can have serious consequences. For example, the town of Eucla, Western Australia, had to be relocated in the 1890s because of dune drift.\nThe modern word \"dune\" came into English from French around 1790, which in turn came from Middle Dutch \"d\u016bne\".\nFormation.\nA universally precise distinction does not exist between ripples, dunes, and a draa, which are all deposits of the same type of materials. Dunes are generally defined as greater than 7cm tall and may have ripples, while ripples are deposits that are less than 3cm tall. A draa is a very large eolian landform, with a length of several kilometers and a height of tens to hundreds of meters, and which may have superimposed dunes.\nDunes are made of sand-sized particles, and may consist of quartz, calcium carbonate, snow, gypsum, or other materials. The upwind/upstream/upcurrent side of the dune is called the stoss side; the downflow side is called the lee side. Sand is pushed (creep) or bounces (saltation) up the stoss side, and slides down the lee side. A side of a dune that the sand has slid down is called a slip face (or slipface).\nThe Bagnold formula gives the speed at which particles can be transported.\nAeolian dunes.\nAeolian dune shapes.\nFive basic dune types are recognized: crescentic, linear, star, dome, and parabolic. Dune areas may occur in three forms: simple (isolated dunes of basic type), compound (larger dunes on which smaller dunes of same type form), and complex (combinations of different types).\nBarchan or crescentic.\nBarchan dunes are crescent-shaped mounds which are generally wider than they are long. The lee-side slipfaces are on the concave sides of the dunes. These dunes form under winds that blow consistently from one direction (unimodal winds). They form separate crescents when the sand supply is comparatively small. When the sand supply is greater, they may merge into barchanoid ridges, and then transverse dunes (see below).\nSome types of crescentic dunes move more quickly over desert surfaces than any other type of dune. A group of dunes moved more than 100 metres per year between 1954 and 1959 in China's Ningxia Province, and similar speeds have been recorded in the Western Desert of Egypt. The largest crescentic dunes on Earth, with mean crest-to-crest widths of more than three kilometres, are in China's Taklamakan Desert.\nSee lunettes and parabolic dunes, below, for dunes similar to crescent-shaped ones.\nTransverse dunes.\nAbundant barchan dunes may merge into barchanoid ridges, which then grade into linear (or slightly sinuous) transverse dunes, so called because they lie transverse, or across, the wind direction, with the wind blowing perpendicular to the ridge crest.\nSeif or longitudinal dunes.\nSeif dunes are linear (or slightly sinuous) dunes with two slip faces. The two slip faces make them sharp-crested. They are called \"seif\" dunes after the Arabic word for \"sword\". They may be more than 160 kilometres (100 miles) long, and thus easily visible in satellite images (see illustrations).\nSeif dunes are associated with bidirectional winds. The long axes and ridges of these dunes extend along the resultant direction of sand movement (hence the name \"longitudinal\"). Some linear dunes merge to form Y-shaped compound dunes.\nFormation is debated. Bagnold, in \"The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes\", suggested that some seif dunes form when a barchan dune moves into a bidirectional wind regime, and one arm or wing of the crescent elongates. Others suggest that seif dunes are formed by vortices in a unidirectional wind. In the sheltered troughs between highly developed seif dunes, barchans may be formed, because the wind is constrained to be unidirectional by the dunes.\nSeif dunes are common in the Sahara. They range up to in height and in length. In the southern third of the Arabian Peninsula, a vast erg, called the Rub' al Khali or Empty Quarter, contains seif dunes that stretch for almost 200\u00a0km and reach heights of over 300\u00a0m.\nLinear loess hills known as pahas are superficially similar. These hills appear to have been formed during the last ice age under permafrost conditions dominated by sparse tundra vegetation.\nStar.\nRadially symmetrical, star dunes are pyramidal sand mounds with slipfaces on three or more arms that radiate from the high center of the mound. They tend to accumulate in areas with multidirectional wind regimes. Star dunes grow upward rather than laterally. They dominate the Grand Erg Oriental of the Sahara. In other deserts, they occur around the margins of the sand seas, particularly near topographic barriers. In the southeast Badain Jaran Desert of China, the star dunes are up to 500 metres tall and may be the tallest dunes on Earth.\nDome.\nOval or circular mounds that generally lack a slipface. Dome dunes are rare and occur at the far upwind margins of sand seas.\nLunettes.\nFixed crescentic dunes that form on the leeward margins of playas and river valleys in arid and semiarid regions in response to the direction (s) of prevailing winds, are known as lunettes, source-bordering dunes, bourrelets and clay dunes. They may be composed of clay, silt, sand, or gypsum, eroded from the basin floor or shore, transported up the concave side of the dune, and deposited on the convex side. Examples in Australia are up to 6.5\u00a0km long, 1\u00a0km wide, and up to 50 metres high. They also occur in southern and West Africa, and in parts of the western United States, especially Texas.\nParabolic.\nU-shaped mounds of sand with convex noses trailed by elongated arms are parabolic dunes. These dunes are formed from blowout dunes where the erosion of vegetated sand leads to a U-shaped depression. The elongated arms are held in place by vegetation; the largest arm known on Earth reaches 12\u00a0km. Sometimes these dunes are called U-shaped, blowout, or hairpin dunes, and they are well known in coastal deserts. Unlike crescent shaped dunes, their crests point upwind. The bulk of the sand in the dune migrates forward.\nIn plan view, these are U-shaped or V-shaped mounds of well-sorted, very fine to medium sand with elongated arms that extend upwind behind the central part of the dune. There are slipfaces that often occur on the outer side of the nose and on the outer slopes of the arms.\nThese dunes often occur in semiarid areas where the precipitation is retained in the lower parts of the dune and underlying soils. The stability of the dunes was once attributed to the vegetative cover but recent research has pointed to water as the main source of parabolic dune stability. The vegetation that covers them\u2014grasses, shrubs, and trees\u2014help anchor the trailing arms. In inland deserts, parabolic dunes commonly originate and extend downwind from blowouts in sand sheets only partly anchored by vegetation. They can also originate from beach sands and extend inland into vegetated areas in coastal zones and on shores of large lakes.\nMost parabolic dunes do not reach heights higher than a few tens of metres except at their nose, where vegetation stops or slows the advance of accumulating sand.\nSimple parabolic dunes have only one set of arms that trail upwind, behind the leading nose. Compound parabolic dunes are coalesced features with several sets of trailing arms. Complex parabolic dunes include subsidiary superposed or coalesced forms, usually of barchanoid or linear shapes.\nParabolic dunes, like crescent dunes, occur in areas where very strong winds are mostly unidirectional. Although these dunes are found in areas now characterized by variable wind speeds, the effective winds associated with the growth and migration of both the parabolic and crescent dunes probably are the most consistent in wind direction.\nThe grain size for these well-sorted, very fine to medium sands is about 0.06 to 0.5\u00a0mm. Parabolic dunes have loose sand and steep slopes only on their outer flanks. The inner slopes are mostly well packed and anchored by vegetation, as are the corridors between individual dunes. Because all dune arms are oriented in the same direction, and, the inter-dune corridors are generally swept clear of loose sand, the corridors can usually be traversed in between the trailing arms of the dune. However to cross straight over the dune by going over the trailing arms, can be very difficult. Also, traversing the nose is very difficult as well because the nose is usually made up of loose sand without much if any vegetation.\nA type of extensive parabolic dune that lacks discernible slipfaces and has mostly coarse grained sand is known as a \"zibar\". The term zibar comes from the Arabic word to describe \"rolling transverse ridges ... with a hard surface\". The dunes are small, have low relief, and can be found in many places across the planet from Wyoming (United States) to Saudi Arabia to Australia. Spacing between zibars ranges from 50 to 400 metres and they don't become more than 10 metres high. The dunes form at about ninety degrees to the prevailing wind which blows away the small, fine-grained sand leaving behind the coarser grained sand to form the crest.\nReversing dunes.\nOccurring wherever winds periodically reverse direction, reversing dunes are varieties of any of the above shapes. These dunes typically have major and minor slipfaces oriented in opposite directions. The minor slipfaces are usually temporary, as they appear after a reverse wind and are generally destroyed when the wind next blows in the dominant direction.\nDraas.\nDraas are very large-scale dune bedforms; they may be tens or a few hundreds of metres in height, kilometres wide, and hundreds of kilometres in length. After a draa has reached a certain size, it generally develops superimposed dune forms. They are thought to be more ancient and slower-moving than smaller dunes, and to form by vertical growth of existing dunes. Draas are widespread in sand seas and are well-represented in the geological record.\nDune complexity.\nAll these dune shapes may occur in three forms: simple (isolated dunes of basic type), compound (lager dunes on which smaller dunes of same type form), and complex (combinations of different types). Simple dunes are basic forms with the minimum number of slipfaces that define the geometric type. Compound dunes are large dunes on which smaller dunes of similar type and slipface orientation are superimposed. Complex dunes are combinations of two or more dune types. A crescentic dune with a star dune superimposed on its crest is the most common complex dune. Simple dunes represent a wind regime that has not changed in intensity or direction since the formation of the dune, while compound and complex dunes suggest that the intensity and direction of the wind has changed.\nDune movement.\nThe sand mass of dunes can move either windward or leeward, depending on if the wind is making contact with the dune from below or above its apogee. If wind hits from above, the sand particles move leeward; the leeward flux of sand is greater than the windward flux. Conversely, if sand hits from below, sand particles move windward. Further, if the wind is carrying sand particles when it hits the dune, the dune's sand particles will saltate more than if the wind had hit the dune without carrying sand particles.\nCoastal dunes.\nCoastal dunes form when wet sand is deposited along the coast and dries out and is blown along the beach. Dunes form where the beach is wide enough to allow for the accumulation of wind-blown sand, and where prevailing onshore winds tend to blow sand inland. The three key ingredients for coastal dune formation are a large sand supply, winds to move said sand supply, and a place for the sand supply to accumulate. Obstacles\u2014for example, vegetation, pebbles and so on\u2014tend to slow down the wind and lead to the deposition of sand grains. These small \"incipient dunes or \"shadow dunes\" tend to grow in the vertical direction if the obstacle slowing the wind can also grow vertically (i.e., vegetation). Coastal dunes expand laterally as a result of lateral growth of coastal plants via seed or rhizome. Models of coastal dunes suggest that their final equilibrium height is related to the distance between the water line and where vegetation can grow. Coastal dunes can be classified by where they develop, or begin to take shape. Dunes are commonly grouped into either the Primary Dune Group or the Secondary Dune Group. Primary dunes gain most of their sand from the beach itself, while secondary dunes gain their sand from the primary dune. Along the Florida Panhandle, most dunes are considered to be foredunes or hummocks. Different locations around the globe have dune formations unique to their given coastal profile.\nCoastal sand dunes can provide privacy and/or habitats to support local flora and fauna. Animals such as sand snakes, lizards, and rodents can live in coastal sand dunes, along with insects of all types. Often the vegetation of sand dunes is discussed without acknowledging the importance that coastal dunes have for animals. Further, some animals, such as foxes and feral pigs can use coastal dunes as hunting grounds to find food. Birds are also known to utilize coastal dunes as nesting grounds. All these species find the coastal environment of the sand dune vital to their species' survival.\nOver the course of time coastal dunes may be impacted by tropical cyclones or other intense storm activity, dependent on their location. Recent work has suggested that coastal dunes tend to evolve toward a high or low morphology depending on the growth rate of dunes relative to storm frequency. During a storm event, dunes play a significant role in minimizing wave energy as it moves onshore. As a result, coastal dunes, especially those in the foredune area affected by a storm surge, will retreat or erode. To counteract the damage from tropical activity on coastal dunes, short term post-storm efforts can be made by individual agencies through fencing to help with sand accumulation.\nHow a much a dune erodes during any storm surge is related to its location on the coastal shoreline and the profile of the beach during a particular season. In those areas with harsher winter weather, during the summer a beach tends to take on more of a convex appearance due to gentler waves, while the same beach in the winter may take on more of a concave appearance. As a result, coastal dunes can get eroded much more quickly in the winter than in the summer. The converse is true in areas with harsher summer weather.\nThere are many threats to these coastal communities. Some coastal dunes, for example ones in San Francisco, have been completely altered by urbanization; reshaping the dune for human use. This puts native species at risk. Another danger, in California and places in the UK specifically, is the introduction of invasive species. Plant species, such as \"Carpobrotus edulis\", were introduced from South Africa in an attempt to stabilize the dunes and provide horticultural benefits, but instead spread taking land away from native species. \"Ammophila arenaria\", known as European beachgrass, has a similar story, though it has no horticulture benefits. It has great ground coverage and, as intended, stabilized the dunes but as an unintended side effect prevented native species from thriving in those dunes. One such example is the dune field at Point Reyes, California. There are now efforts to get rid of both of these invasive species.\nEcological succession on coastal dunes.\nAs a dune forms, plant succession occurs. The conditions on an \"embryo dune\" are harsh, with salt spray from the sea carried on strong winds. The dune is well drained and often dry, and composed of calcium carbonate from seashells. Rotting seaweed, brought in by storm waves adds nutrients to allow pioneer species to colonize the dune. For example, in the United Kingdom these pioneer species are often marram grass, sea wort grass and other sea grasses. These plants are well adapted to the harsh conditions of the foredune, typically having deep roots which reach the water table, root nodules that produce nitrogen compounds, and protected stoma, reducing transpiration. Also, the deep roots bind the sand together, and the dune grows into a foredune as more sand is blown over the grasses. The grasses add nitrogen to the soil, meaning other, less hardy plants can then colonize the dunes. Typically these are heather, heaths and gorses. These too are adapted to the low soil water content and have small, prickly leaves which reduce transpiration. Heather adds humus to the soil and is usually replaced by coniferous trees, which can tolerate low soil pH, caused by the accumulation and decomposition of organic matter with nitrate leaching. Coniferous forests and heathland are common climax communities for sand dune systems.\nYoung dunes are called yellow dunes and dunes which have high humus content are called grey dunes. Leaching occurs on the dunes, washing humus into the slacks, and the slacks may be much more developed than the exposed tops of the dunes. It is usually in the slacks that more rare species are developed and there is a tendency for the dune slacks' soil to be waterlogged where only marsh plants can survive. In Europe these plants include: creeping willow, cotton grass, yellow iris, reeds, and rushes. As for vertebrates in European dunes, natterjack toads sometimes breed here.\nCoastal dune floral adaptations.\nDune ecosystems are extremely difficult places for plants to survive. This is due to a number of pressures related to their proximity to the ocean and confinement to growth on sandy substrates. These include:\nThere are many adaptations plants have evolved to cope with these pressures:\nGypsum dunes.\nIn deserts where large amounts of limestone mountains surround a closed basin, such as at White Sands National Park in south-central New Mexico, occasional storm runoff transports dissolved limestone and gypsum into a low-lying pan within the basin where the water evaporates, depositing the gypsum and forming crystals known as selenite. The crystals left behind by this process are eroded by the wind and deposited as vast white dune fields that resemble snow-covered landscapes. These types of dune are rare, and only form in closed arid basins that retain the highly soluble gypsum that would otherwise be washed into the sea.\nNabkha dunes.\nA nabkha, or coppice dune, is a small dune anchored by vegetation. They usually indicate desertification or soil erosion, and serve as nesting and burrow sites for animals.\nSub-aqueous dunes.\nSub-aqueous (underwater) dunes form on a bed of sand or gravel under the actions of water flow. They are ubiquitous in natural channels such as rivers and estuaries, and also form in engineered canals and pipelines. Dunes move downstream as the upstream slope is eroded and the sediment deposited on the downstream or lee slope in typical bedform construction. In the case of sub-aqueous barchan dunes, sediment is lost by their extremities, known as horns.\nThese dunes most often form as a continuous 'train' of dunes, showing remarkable similarity in wavelength and height. The shape of a dune gives information about its formation environment. For instance, rivers produce asymmetrical ripples, with the steeper slip face facing downstream. Ripple marks preserved in sedimentary strata in the geological record can be used to determine the direction of current flow, and thus an indication of the source of the sediments.\nDunes on the bed of a channel significantly increase flow resistance, their presence and growth playing a major part in river flooding.\nLithified dunes.\nA lithified (consolidated) sand dune is a type of sandstone that is formed when a marine or aeolian sand dune becomes compacted and hardened. Once in this form, water passing through the rock can carry and deposit minerals, which can alter the color of the rock. Cross-bedded layers of stacks of lithified dunes can produce the cross-hatching patterns, such as those seen in Zion National Park in the western United States.\nA slang term, used in the southwest US, for consolidated and hardened sand dunes is \"slickrock\", a name that was introduced by pioneers of the Old West because their steel-rimmed wagon wheels could not gain traction on the rock.\nDesertification.\nSand dunes can have a negative impact on humans when they encroach on human habitats. Sand dunes move via a few different means, all of them helped along by wind. One way that dunes can move is by saltation, where sand particles skip along the ground like a bouncing ball. When these skipping particles land, they may knock into other particles and cause them to move as well, in a process known as creep. With slightly stronger winds, particles collide in mid-air, causing sheet flows. In a major dust storm, dunes may move tens of metres through such sheet flows. Also as in the case of snow, sand avalanches, falling down the slipface of the dunes\u2014that face away from the winds\u2014also move the dunes forward.\nSand threatens buildings and crops in Africa, the Middle East, and China. Drenching sand dunes with oil stops their migration, but this approach uses a valuable resource and is quite destructive to the dunes' animal habitats. Sand fences might also slow their movement to a crawl, but geologists are still analyzing results for the optimum fence designs. Preventing sand dunes from overwhelming towns, villages, and agricultural areas has become a priority for the United Nations Environment Programme. Planting dunes with vegetation also helps to stabilise them.\nConservation.\nDune habitats provide niches for highly specialized plants and animals, including numerous rare species and some endangered species. Due to widespread human population expansion, dunes face destruction through land development and recreational usages, as well as alteration to prevent the encroachment of sand onto inhabited areas. Some countries, notably the United States, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Netherlands, and Sri Lanka have developed significant programs of dune protection through the use of sand dune stabilization. In the U.K., a Biodiversity Action Plan has been developed to assess dunes loss and to prevent future dunes destruction.\nExamples.\nExtraterrestrial dunes.\nDunes can likely be found in any environment where there is a substantial atmosphere, winds, and dust to be blown. Dunes are common on Mars and in the equatorial regions of Titan.\nTitan's dunes include large expanses with modal lengths of about 20\u201330\u00a0km. The regions are not topographically confined, resembling sand seas. These dunes are interpreted to be longitudinal dunes whose crests are oriented parallel to the dominant wind direction, which generally indicates west-to-east wind flow. The sand is likely composed of hydrocarbon particles, possibly with some water ice mixed in.\nDunes are a popular theme in science fiction, featuring in depictions of dry Desert planets appearing as early as the 1956 film \"Forbidden Planet\" and Frank Herbert's 1965 novel \"Dune\". The environment of the desert planet Arrakis (also known as Dune) in the \"Dune\" franchise \"Dune\" in turn inspired the \"Star Wars\" franchise, which includes prominent theme of dunes on fictional planets such as Tatooine, Geonosis, and Jakku."}
{"id": "7891", "revid": "1276024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7891", "title": "David Lynch", "text": "David Keith Lynch (born January 20, 1946) is an American filmmaker, painter, musician, writer and actor. His films led to him being labeled \"the first popular surrealist\" by film critic Pauline Kael. A recipient of an Academy Honorary Award in 2019, Lynch has received three Academy Award nominations for Best Director, and the C\u00e9sar Award for Best Foreign Film twice, as well as the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival and a Golden Lion award for lifetime achievement at the Venice Film Festival. In 2007, a panel of critics convened by \"The Guardian\" announced that 'after all the discussion, no one could fault the conclusion that David Lynch is the most important film-maker of the current era', while AllMovie called him \"the Renaissance man of modern American filmmaking\".\nLynch initially studied painting before he began making short films in the late 1960s. His first feature-length film, the surrealist horror \"Eraserhead\" (1977), became a success on the midnight movie circuit, and he followed that by directing \"The Elephant Man\" (1980), \"Dune\" (1984), and \"Blue Velvet\" (1986). Lynch next created his own television series with Mark Frost, the popular murder mystery \"Twin Peaks\" (1990\u201391), which ran for two seasons. He also created the film prequel \"\" (1992), the road film \"Wild at Heart\" (1990), and the family film \"The Straight Story\" (1999) in the same period. Turning further towards surrealist filmmaking, three of his subsequent films operated on dream logic non-linear narrative structures: \"Lost Highway\" (1997), \"Mulholland Drive\" (2001), and \"Inland Empire\" (2006). Lynch and Frost reunited in 2017 for a third season of \"Twin Peaks\", which aired on Showtime. Lynch co-wrote and directed every episode, and reprised his onscreen role as Gordon Cole.\nLynch's other artistic endeavors include his work as a musician, encompassing the studio albums \"BlueBOB\" (2001), \"Crazy Clown Time\" (2011), and \"The Big Dream\" (2013), as well as music and sound design for a variety of his films (sometimes alongside collaborators Alan Splet, Dean Hurley, and/or Angelo Badalamenti); painting and photography; writing the books \"Images\" (1994), \"Catching the Big Fish\" (2006), \"Room to Dream\" (2018), and numerous other literary works; and directing several music videos (such as the video for \"Shot in the Back of the Head\" by Moby, who, in turn, directed a video for Lynch's \"The Big Dream\") as well as advertisements, including the Dior promotional film \"Lady Blue Shanghai\" (2006). An avid practitioner of Transcendental Meditation (TM), in 2005 he founded the David Lynch Foundation, which seeks to fund the teaching of TM in schools and has since widened its scope to other at-risk populations, including the homeless, veterans and refugees.\nEarly life.\nDavid Keith Lynch was born in Missoula, Montana on January 20, 1946. His father, Donald Walton Lynch (1915\u20132007), was a research scientist working for the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and his mother, Edwina \"Sunny\" Lynch (n\u00e9e Sundholm; 1919\u20132004), was an English language tutor. Two of Lynch's maternal great-grandparents were Finnish-Swedish immigrants who arrived in the U.S. during the 19th century. He was raised a Presbyterian. The Lynches often moved around according to where the USDA assigned Donald. Because of this, Lynch, moved with his parents to Sandpoint, Idaho, when he was two months old; two years later, after his brother John was born, the family moved to Spokane, Washington. Lynch's sister Martha was born there. The family then moved to Durham, North Carolina, Boise, Idaho, and Alexandria, Virginia. Lynch adjusted to this transitory early life with relative ease, noting that he usually had no issue making new friends whenever he started attending a new school. Of his early life, he remarked:\nAlongside his schooling, Lynch joined the Boy Scouts, although he later said he only \"became [a Scout] so I could quit and put it behind me\". He rose to the highest rank of Eagle Scout. As an Eagle Scout, he was present with other Boy Scouts outside the White House at the inauguration of President John F. Kennedy, which took place on Lynch's 15th birthday. Lynch was also interested in painting and drawing from an early age, and became intrigued by the idea of pursuing it as a career path when living in Virginia, where his friend's father was a professional painter.\nAt Francis C. Hammond High School in Alexandria, Lynch did not excel academically, having little interest in schoolwork, but he was popular with other students, and after leaving he decided that he wanted to study painting at college. He began his studies at the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design in Washington, D.C., before transferring in 1964 to the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, where he was roommates with musician Peter Wolf. He left after only a year, saying, \"I was not inspired AT ALL in that place.\" He instead decided that he wanted to travel around Europe for three years with his friend Jack Fisk, who was similarly unhappy with his studies at Cooper Union. They had some hopes that they could train in Europe with Austrian expressionist painter Oskar Kokoschka at his school. Upon reaching Salzburg, however, they found that Kokoschka was not available; disillusioned, they returned to the United States after spending only two weeks in Europe.\nCareer.\n1960s: Philadelphia and short films.\nBack in the United States, Lynch returned to Virginia, but since his parents had moved to Walnut Creek, California, he stayed with his friend Toby Keeler for a while. He decided to move to Philadelphia and enroll at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, after advice from Fisk, who was already enrolled there. He preferred this college to his previous school in Boston, saying, \"In Philadelphia there were great and serious painters, and everybody was inspiring one another and it was a beautiful time there.\" It was here that he began a relationship with a fellow student, Peggy Reavey, whom he married in 1967. The following year, Peggy gave birth to their daughter Jennifer. Peggy later said, \"[Lynch] definitely was a reluctant father, but a very loving one. Hey, I was pregnant when we got married. We were both reluctant.\" As a family, they moved to Philadelphia's Fairmount neighborhood, where they bought a 12-room house for the relatively low price of $3,500 due to the area's high crime and poverty rates. Lynch later said:\nMeanwhile, to help support his family, he took a job printing engravings. At the Pennsylvania Academy, Lynch made his first short film, \"Six Men Getting Sick (Six Times)\" (1967). He had first come up with the idea when he developed a wish to see his paintings move, and he began discussing doing animation with an artist named Bruce Samuelson. When this project never came about, Lynch decided to work on a film alone, and purchased the cheapest 16mm camera that he could find. Taking one of the Academy's abandoned upper rooms as a workspace, he spent $150, which at the time he felt to be a lot of money, to produce \"Six Men Getting Sick\". Calling the film \"57\u00a0seconds of growth and fire, and three seconds of vomit\", Lynch played it on a loop at the Academy's annual end-of-year exhibit, where it shared joint first prize with a painting by Noel Mahaffey. This led to a commission from one of his fellow students, the wealthy H. Barton Wasserman, who offered him $1,000 to create a film installation in his home. Spending $478 of that on the second-hand Bolex camera \"of [his] dreams\", Lynch produced a new animated short, but upon getting the film developed, realized that the result was a blurred, frameless print. He later said, \"So I called up [Wasserman] and said, 'Bart, the film is a disaster. The camera was broken and what I've done hasn't turned out.' And he said, 'Don't worry, David, take the rest of the money and make something else for me. Just give me a print.' End of story.\"\nWith his leftover money, Lynch decided to experiment with a mix of animation and live action, producing the four-minute short \"The Alphabet\" (1968). The film starred Lynch's wife Peggy as a character known as The Girl, who chants the alphabet to a series of images of horses before dying at the end by hemorrhaging blood all over her bed sheets. Adding a sound effect, Lynch used a broken Uher tape recorder to record the sound of Jennifer crying, creating a distorted sound that Lynch found particularly effective. Later describing what had inspired him, Lynch said, \"Peggy's niece was having a bad dream one night and was saying the alphabet in her sleep in a tormented way. So that's sort of what started \"The Alphabet\" going. The rest of it was just subconscious.\"\nLearning about the newly founded American Film Institute, which gave grants to filmmakers who could support their application with a prior work and a script for a new project, Lynch decided to send them a copy of \"The Alphabet\" along with a script he had written for a new short film that would be almost entirely live action, \"The Grandmother\". The institute agreed to help finance the work, initially offering him $5,000 out of his requested budget of $7,200, but later granting him the additional $2,200. Starring people he knew from both work and college and filmed in his own house, \"The Grandmother\" featured a neglected boy who \"grows\" a grandmother from a seed to care for him. The film critics Michelle Le Blanc and Colin Odell wrote, \"this film is a true oddity but contains many of the themes and ideas that would filter into his later work, and shows a remarkable grasp of the medium\".\n1970s: Los Angeles and \"Eraserhead\".\nIn 1971, Lynch moved with his wife and daughter to Los Angeles, where he began studying filmmaking at the AFI Conservatory, a place he later called \"completely chaotic and disorganized, which was great\u00a0... you quickly learned that if you were going to get something done, you would have to do it yourself. They wanted to let people do their thing.\" He began writing a script for a proposed work, \"Gardenback\", that had \"unfolded from this painting I'd done\". In this venture he was supported by a number of figures at the Conservatory, who encouraged him to lengthen the script and add more dialogue, which he reluctantly agreed to do. All the interference on his \"Gardenback\" project made him fed up with the Conservatory and led him to quit after returning to start his second year and being put in first-year classes. AFI dean Frank Daniel asked Lynch to reconsider, believing that he was one of the school's best students. Lynch agreed on the condition that he could create a project that would not be interfered with. Feeling that \"Gardenback\" was \"wrecked\", he set out on a new film, \"Eraserhead\".\n\"Eraserhead\" was planned to be about 42 minutes long (it ended up being 89 minutes), its script was only 21 pages, and Lynch was able to create the film without interference. Filming began on May 29, 1972, at night in some abandoned stables, allowing the production team, which was largely Lynch and some of his friends, including Sissy Spacek, Jack Fisk, cinematographer Frederick Elmes and sound designer Alan Splet, to set up a camera room, green room, editing room, sets as well as a food room and a bathroom. The AFI gave Lynch a $10,000 grant, but it was not enough to complete the film, and under pressure from studios after the success of the relatively cheap feature film \"Easy Rider\", it was unable to give him more. Lynch was then supported by a loan from his father and money that he earned from a paper route that he took up, delivering \"The Wall Street Journal\". Not long into \"Eraserhead\"'s production, Lynch and Peggy amicably separated and divorced, and he began living full-time on set. In 1977, Lynch married Mary Fisk, sister of Jack Fisk.\nLynch has said that not a single reviewer of the film understood it in the way he intended. Filmed in black and white, \"Eraserhead\" tells the story of Henry (Jack Nance), a quiet young man living in a dystopian industrial wasteland, whose girlfriend gives birth to a deformed baby whom she leaves in his care. It was heavily influenced by the fearful mood of Philadelphia, and Lynch has called it \"my \"Philadelphia Story\"\".\nDue to financial problems the filming of \"Eraserhead\" was haphazard, regularly stopping and starting again. It was in one such break in 1974 that Lynch created the short film \"The Amputee\", a one-shot film about two minutes long. Lynch proposed that he make \"The Amputee\" to present to AFI to test two different types of film stock.\n\"Eraserhead\" was finally finished in 1976. Lynch tried to get it entered into the Cannes Film Festival, but while some reviewers liked it, others felt it was awful, and it was not selected for screening. Reviewers from the New York Film Festival also rejected it, but it was screened at the Los Angeles Film Festival, where Ben Barenholtz, the distributor of the Elgin Theater, heard about it. He was very supportive of the movie, helping to distribute it around the United States in 1977, and \"Eraserhead\" subsequently became popular on the midnight movie underground circuit, and was later called one of the most important midnight movies of the 1970s, along with \"El Topo\", \"Pink Flamingos\", \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\", \"The Harder They Come\" and \"Night of the Living Dead\". Stanley Kubrick said it was one of his all-time favorite films.\n1980s: \"The Elephant Man\", \"Dune\" and \"Blue Velvet\".\nAfter \"Eraserhead\"'s success on the underground circuit, Stuart Cornfeld, an executive producer for Mel Brooks, saw it and later said, \"I was just 100 percent blown away\u00a0... I thought it was the greatest thing I'd ever seen. It was such a cleansing experience.\" He agreed to help Lynch with his next film, \"Ronnie Rocket\", for which Lynch had already written a script. But Lynch soon realized that \"Ronnie Rocket\", a film that he has said is about \"electricity and a three-foot guy with red hair\", was not going to be picked up by any financiers, and so he asked Cornfeld to find him a script by someone else that he could direct. Cornfeld found four. On hearing the title of the first, \"The Elephant Man\", Lynch chose it.\n\"The Elephant Man\"'s script, written by Chris de Vore and Eric Bergren, was based on a true story, that of Joseph Merrick, a severely deformed man in Victorian London, who was held in a sideshow but later taken under the care of a London surgeon, Frederick Treves. Lynch wanted to make some alterations that would alter the story from true events but in his view make a better plot, but he needed Mel Brooks's permission, as Brooks's company, Brooksfilms, was responsible for production. Brooks viewed \"Eraserhead\", and after coming out of the screening theatre, embraced Lynch, declaring, \"You're a madman! I love you! You're in.\"\n\"The Elephant Man\" starred John Hurt as John Merrick (the name changed from Joseph) and Anthony Hopkins as Treves. Filming took place in London. Though surrealistic and in black and white, it has been called \"one of the most conventional\" of Lynch's films. \"The Elephant Man\" was a huge critical and commercial success, earning eight Academy Award nominations, including Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay.\nAfter \"The Elephant Man\"'s success, George Lucas, a fan of \"Eraserhead\", offered Lynch the opportunity to direct the third film in his \"Star Wars\" trilogy, \"Return of the Jedi\". Lynch refused, arguing that Lucas should direct the film himself as the movie should reflect his own vision, not Lynch's. Soon, the opportunity to direct another big-budget science fiction epic arose when Dino de Laurentiis of the De Laurentiis Entertainment Group asked Lynch to create a film adaptation of Frank Herbert's science fiction novel \"Dune\" (1965). Lynch agreed, and in doing so was also contractually obliged to produce two other works for the company. He set about writing a script based upon the novel, initially with both Chris de Vore and Eric Bergren, and then alone when De Laurentiis was unhappy with their ideas. Lynch also helped build some of the sets, attempting to create \"a certain look\", and particularly enjoyed building the set for the oil planet Giedi Prime, for which he used \"steel, bolts, and porcelain\".\n\"Dune\" is set in the far future, when humans live in an interstellar empire under a feudal system. The main character, Paul Atreides (Kyle MacLachlan), is the son of a noble who takes control of the desert planet Arrakis, which grows the rare spice melange, the empire's most highly prized commodity. Lynch was unhappy with the work, later saying, \"\"Dune\" was a kind of studio film. I didn't have final cut. And, little by little, I was subconsciously making compromises\" [to his own vision]. Much of his footage was eventually removed from the final theatrical cut, dramatically condensing the plot. Although De Laurentiis hoped it would be as successful as \"Star Wars\", \"Dune\" (1984) was a critical and commercial dud; it had cost $45\u00a0million to make, and grossed $27.4\u00a0million domestically. Later, Universal Studios released an \"extended cut\" for syndicated television, containing almost an hour of cutting-room-floor footage and new narration. It did not represent Lynch's intentions, but the studio considered it more comprehensible than the original version. Lynch objected to the changes and had his name struck from the extended cut, which has Alan Smithee credited as the director and \"Judas Booth\" (a pseudonym Lynch invented, reflecting his feelings of betrayal) as the screenwriter.\nMeanwhile, in 1983, he had begun the writing and drawing of a comic strip, \"The Angriest Dog in the World\", which featured unchanging graphics of a tethered dog that was so angry that it could not move, alongside cryptic philosophical references. It ran from 1983 to 1992 in the \"Village Voice,\" \"Creative Loafing\" and other tabloid and alternative publications. Around this time Lynch also became interested in photography as an art form, and traveled to northern England to photograph the degrading industrial landscape.\nLynch was contractually still obliged to produce two other projects for De Laurentiis, the first a planned sequel to \"Dune\", which due to the film's failure never went beyond the script stage. The other was a more personal work, based on a script Lynch had been working on for some time. Developing from ideas that Lynch had had since 1973, the film, \"Blue Velvet\", was set in the real town of Lumberton, North Carolina, and revolves around a college student, Jeffrey Beaumont (MacLachlan), who finds a severed ear in a field. Investigating further with the help of friend Sandy (Laura Dern), he discovers that it is related to a criminal gang led by psychopath Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper), who has kidnapped the husband and child of singer Dorothy Vallens (Isabella Rossellini) and repeatedly rapes her. Lynch has called the story \"a dream of strange desires wrapped inside a mystery story\".\nLynch included pop songs from the 1960s in the film, including Roy Orbison's \"In Dreams\" and Bobby Vinton's \"Blue Velvet\", the latter of which largely inspired the film. Lynch has said, \"It was the song that sparked the movie\u00a0... There was something mysterious about it. It made me think about things. And the first things I thought about were lawns\u2014lawns and the neighborhood.\" Other music for the film was composed by Angelo Badalamenti, who wrote the music for most of Lynch's subsequent work. De Laurentiis loved the film, and it received support at some of the early specialist screenings, but the preview screenings to mainstream audiences were very negatively received, with most of the viewers hating the film. Lynch had found success with \"The Elephant Man\", but \"Blue Velvet\"s controversy with audiences and critics introduced him into the mainstream, and it became a huge critical and moderate commercial success. The film earned Lynch his second Academy Award nomination for Best Director. Woody Allen, whose \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" was nominated for Best Picture, said \"Blue Velvet\" was his favorite film of the year. In the late 1980s, Lynch began to work in television, directing a short piece, \"The Cowboy and the Frenchman\", for French television in 1989.\n1990s: \"Twin Peaks\", \"Wild at Heart\".\nAround this time, he met the television producer Mark Frost, who had worked on such projects as \"Hill Street Blues\", and they decided to start working together on a biopic of Marilyn Monroe based on Anthony Summers's book \"The Goddess: The Secret Lives of Marilyn Monroe\", but it never got off the ground. They went on to work on a comedy script, \"One Saliva Bubble\", but that did not see completion either. While talking in a coffee shop, Lynch and Frost had the idea of a corpse washing up on a lakeshore, and went to work on their third project, initially called \"Northwest Passage\" but eventually \"Twin Peaks\" (1990\u201391). A drama series set in a small Washington town where popular high school student Laura Palmer has been murdered, \"Twin Peaks\" featured FBI Special Agent Dale Cooper (MacLachlan) as the investigator trying to identify the killer, and discovering not only the murder's supernatural aspects but also many of the townsfolk's secrets; Lynch said, \"The project was to mix a police investigation with the ordinary lives of the characters.\" He later said, \"[Mark Frost and I] worked together, especially in the initial stages. Later on we started working more apart.\" They pitched the series to ABC, which agreed to finance the pilot and eventually commissioned a season comprising seven episodes.\nDuring season one Lynch directed two of the seven episodes, devoting more time to his film \"Wild at Heart\", but carefully chose the other episodes' directors. He also appeared in several episodes as FBI agent Gordon Cole. The series was a success, with high ratings in the United States and many other countries, and soon spawned a cult following. Soon a second season of 22 episodes went into production, but ABC executives believed that public interest in the show was decreasing. The network insisted that Lynch and Frost reveal Laura Palmer's killer's identity prematurely, which Lynch grudgingly agreed to do, in what Lynch has called one of his biggest professional regrets. After identifying the murderer and moving from Thursday to Saturday night, \"Twin Peaks\" continued for several more episodes, but was canceled after a ratings drop. Lynch, who disliked the direction that writers and directors took in the later episodes, directed the final episode. He ended it with a cliffhanger (like season one had), later saying, \"that's not the ending. That's the ending that people were stuck with.\"\nAlso while \"Twin Peaks\" was in production, the Brooklyn Academy of Music asked Lynch and Badalamenti, who wrote the music for \"Twin Peaks\", to create a theatrical piece to be performed twice in 1989 as a part of the New Music America Festival. The result was \"Industrial Symphony No. 1: The Dream of the Broken Hearted\", which starred frequent Lynch collaborators such as Laura Dern, Nicolas Cage and Michael J. Anderson, and contained five songs sung by Julee Cruise. Lynch produced a 50-minute video of the performance in 1990. Meanwhile, he was also involved in creating various commercials for companies including Yves Saint Laurent, Calvin Klein, Giorgio Armani and the Japanese coffee company Namoi, which featured a Japanese man searching Twin Peaks for his missing wife.\nWhile Lynch was working on the first few episodes of \"Twin Peaks\", his friend Monty Montgomery \"gave me a book that he wanted to direct as a movie. He asked if I would maybe be executive producer or something, and I said 'That's great, Monty, but what if I read it and fall in love with it and want to do it myself?' And he said, 'In that case, you can do it yourself'.\" The book was Barry Gifford's novel \"Wild at Heart: The Story of Sailor and Lula\", about two lovers on a road trip. Lynch felt that it was \"just exactly the right thing at the right time. The book and the violence in America merged in my mind and many different things happened.\" With Gifford's support, Lynch adapted the novel into \"Wild at Heart\", a crime and road movie starring Nicolas Cage as Sailor and Laura Dern as Lula. Describing its plot as a \"strange blend\" of \"a road picture, a love story, a psychological drama and a violent comedy\", Lynch altered much of the original novel, changing the ending and incorporating numerous references to \"The Wizard of Oz\". Despite a muted response from American critics and viewers, \"Wild at Heart\" won the Palme d'Or at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival.\nAfter \"Wild at Heart\"'s success, Lynch returned to the world of the canceled \"Twin Peaks\", this time without Frost, to create a film that was primarily a prequel but also in part a sequel. Lynch said, \"I liked the idea of the story going back and forth in time.\" The result, \"\" (1992), primarily revolved around the last few days in the life of Laura Palmer, and was much \"darker\" in tone than the TV series, with much of the humor removed, and dealing with such topics as incest and murder. Lynch has said the film is about \"the loneliness, shame, guilt, confusion and devastation of the victim of incest\". The company CIBY-2000 financed \"Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me\", and most of the TV series' cast reprised their roles, though some refused and many were unenthusiastic about the project. The film was a commercial and critical failure in the United States but a hit in Japan, and some critics, such as Mark Kermode, have called it Lynch's \"masterpiece\".\nMeanwhile, Lynch worked on some new television shows. He and Frost created the comedy series \"On the Air\" (1992), which was canceled after three episodes aired, and he and Monty Montgomery created the three-episode HBO miniseries \"Hotel Room\" (1993) about events that happen in one hotel room on different dates.\nIn 1993, Lynch collaborated with Japanese musician Yoshiki on the video for X Japan's song \"Longing ~Setsubou no Yoru~\". The video was never officially released, but Lynch claimed in his 2018 memoir \"Room to Dream\" that \"some of the frames are so fuckin' beautiful, you can't believe it.\"\nAfter his unsuccessful TV ventures, Lynch returned to film. In 1997 he released the non-linear, noiresque \"Lost Highway\", which was co-written by Barry Gifford and starred Bill Pullman and Patricia Arquette. The film failed commercially and received a mixed response from critics.\nLynch then began work on a film from a script by Mary Sweeney and John E. Roach, \"The Straight Story\", based on a true story: that of Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth), an elderly man from Laurens, Iowa, who goes on a 300-mile journey to visit his sick brother (Harry Dean Stanton) in Mount Zion, Wisconsin, by riding lawnmower. Asked why he chose this script, Lynch said, \"that's what I fell in love with next\", and expressed his admiration of Straight, describing him as \"like James Dean, except he's old\". Badalamenti wrote the music for the film, saying it was \"very different from the kind of score he's done for [Lynch] in the past\".\nAmong the many differences from Lynch's other films, \"The Straight Story\" contains no profanity, sexuality or violence, and is rated G (general viewing) by the Motion Picture Association of America, which came as \"shocking news\" to many in the film industry, who were surprised that it \"did not disturb, offend or mystify\". Le Blanc and Odell write that the plot made it \"seem as far removed from Lynch's earlier works as could be imagined, but in fact right from the very opening, this is entirely his film\u2014a surreal road movie\".\n2000s: \"Mulholland Drive\" and other works.\nThe same year, Lynch approached ABC again with ideas for a television drama. The network gave Lynch the go-ahead to shoot a two-hour pilot for the series \"Mulholland Drive\", but disputes over content and running time led to the project being shelved indefinitely. But with $7 million from the French production company StudioCanal, Lynch completed the pilot as a film, \"Mulholland Drive\". The film, a non-linear narrative surrealist tale of Hollywood's dark side, stars Naomi Watts, Laura Harring and Justin Theroux. It performed relatively well at the box office worldwide and was a critical success, earning Lynch Best Director at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival (shared with Joel Coen for \"The Man Who Wasn't There\") and Best Director from the New York Film Critics Association. He also received his third Academy Award nomination for Best Director. In 2016, the film was named the best film of the 21st century in a BBC poll of 177 film critics from 36 countries.\nWith the rising popularity of the Internet, Lynch decided to use it as a distribution channel, releasing several new series he had created exclusively on his website, davidlynch.com, which went online on December 10, 2001. In 2002, he created a series of online shorts, \"DumbLand\". Intentionally crude in content and execution, the eight-episode series was later released on DVD. The same year, Lynch released a surreal sitcom, \"Rabbits\", about a family of humanoid rabbits. Later, he made his experiments with Digital Video available in the form of the Japanese-style horror short \"Darkened Room\". In 2006, Lynch's feature film \"Inland Empire\" was released. At three hours, it is the longest of his films. Like \"Mulholland Drive\" and \"Lost Highway\", it does not follow a traditional narrative structure. It stars Lynch regulars Laura Dern, Harry Dean Stanton and Justin Theroux, with cameos by Naomi Watts and Laura Harring as the voices of Suzie and Jane Rabbit, and a performance by Jeremy Irons. Lynch has called \"Inland Empire\" \"a mystery about a woman in trouble\". In an effort to promote it, he made appearances with a cow and a placard bearing the slogan \"Without cheese there would be no \"Inland Empire\"\".\nIn 2009, Lynch produced a documentary web series directed by his son Austin Lynch and friend Jason S., \"Interview Project\". Interested in working with Werner Herzog, in 2009 Lynch collaborated on Herzog's film \"My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done?\". With a nonstandard narrative, the film is based on a true story of an actor who committed matricide while acting in a production of the Oresteia, and starred Lynch regular Grace Zabriskie. In 2009 Lynch had plans to direct a documentary on Maharishi Mahesh Yogi consisting of interviews with people who knew him, but nothing has come of it.\n2010s: Continued work, \"Twin Peaks\" revival.\nIn 2010, Lynch began making guest appearances on the \"Family Guy\" spin-off \"The Cleveland Show\" as Gus the Bartender. He had been convinced to appear in the show by its lead actor, Mike Henry, a fan of Lynch who felt that his whole life had changed after seeing \"Wild at Heart\". \"Lady Blue Shanghai\" is a 16-minute promotional film that was written, directed and edited by Lynch for Dior. It was released on the Internet in May 2010.\nLynch directed a concert by English new wave band Duran Duran on March 23, 2011. The concert was streamed live on YouTube from the Mayan Theater in Los Angeles as the kickoff to the second season of \"\". \"The idea is to try and create on the fly, layers of images permeating Duran Duran on the stage\", Lynch said. \"A world of experimentation and hopefully some happy accidents\". The animated short \"I Touch a Red Button Man\", a collaboration between Lynch and the band Interpol, played in the background during Interpol's concert at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2011. The short, which features Interpol's song \"Lights\", was later made available online.\nIt was believed that Lynch was going to retire from the film industry; according to Abel Ferrara, Lynch \"doesn't even want to make films any more. I've talked to him about it, OK? I can tell when he talks about it.\" But in a June 2012 \"Los Angeles Times\" interview, Lynch said he lacked the inspiration to start a new movie project, but \"If I got an idea that I fell in love with, I'd go to work tomorrow\". In September 2012, he appeared in the three-part \"Late Show\" arc on FX's \"Louie\" as Jack Dahl. In November 2012, Lynch hinted at plans for a new film while attending Plus Camerimage in Bydgoszcz, Poland, saying, \"something is coming up. It will happen but I don't know exactly when\". At Plus Camerimage, Lynch received a lifetime achievement award and the Key to the City from Bydgoszcz's mayor, Rafa\u0142 Bruski. In a January 2013 interview with the \"Los Angeles Times\", Laura Dern confirmed that she and Lynch were planning a new project, and \"The New York Times\" later revealed that Lynch was working on the script. \"Idem Paris\", a short documentary film about the lithographic process, was released online in February 2013. On June 28, 2013, a video Lynch directed for the Nine Inch Nails song \"Came Back Haunted\" was released. He also did photography for the Dumb Numbers' self-titled album released in August 2013.\nOn October 6, 2014, Lynch confirmed via Twitter that he and Frost would start shooting a new, nine-episode season of \"Twin Peaks\" in 2015, with the episodes expected to air in 2016 on Showtime. Lynch and Frost wrote all the episodes. On April 5, 2015, Lynch announced via Twitter that the project was still alive, but he was no longer going to direct because the budget was too low for what he wanted to do. On May 15, 2015, he said via Twitter that he would return to the revival, having sorted out his issues with Showtime. Showtime CEO David Nevins confirmed this, announcing that Lynch would direct every episode of the revival and that the original nine episodes had been extended to 18. Filming was completed by April 2016. The two-episode premiere aired on May 21, 2017.\nWhile doing press for \"Twin Peaks\", Lynch was again asked if he had retired from film and seemed to confirm that he had made his last feature film, responding, \"Things changed a lot... So many films were not doing well at the box office even though they might have been great films and the things that were doing well at the box office weren't the things that I would want to do\". Lynch later said that this statement had been misconstrued: \"I did not say I quit cinema, simply that nobody knows what the future holds.\"\nSince the last episode of \"The Return\" aired, there has been speculation about a fourth season. Lynch did not deny the possibility of another season, but said that if it were to happen, it would not air before 2021.\n2020s: Weather reports and short films.\nLynch did weather reports on his now defunct website in the early 2000s. He has returned to doing weather reports from his apartment in Los Angeles, along with two new series, \"What is David Lynch Working on Today?\", which details him making collages and \"Today's Number Is...\", where each day he picks a random number from a jar. In one of his weather reports, he detailed a dream he had about being a German soldier shot by an American soldier on D-Day. Lynch rereleased his 2002 film \"Rabbits\" on YouTube. On July 17, 2020, his store for merchandise released a set of face masks with Lynch's art on them for the COVID-19 pandemic.\nLynch is reportedly working on a new project for Netflix under the working titles \"Wisteria\" and \"Unrecorded Night\". He is set to write and direct 13 episodes with an $85 million budget; production will begin in May 2021 in Los Angeles.\nCinematic influences and themes.\nInfluences.\nLynch has said his work is more similar in many respects to that of European filmmakers than American ones, and that most films that \"get down and thrill your soul\" are by European directors. He has expressed his admiration for such filmmakers as Federico Fellini, Werner Herzog, Alfred Hitchcock, Roman Polanski, and Jacques Tati, along with Stanley Kubrick and Billy Wilder. He has said that Wilder's \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950) is one of his favorite pictures, as are Kubrick's \"Lolita\" (1962), Tati's \"Monsieur Hulot's Holiday\" (1953), Hitchcock's \"Rear Window\" (1954), and Herzog's \"Stroszek\" (1977). He has also cited Herk Harvey's \"Carnival of Souls\" (1962) and Jerzy Skolimowski's \"Deep End\" (1970) as influences on his work.\nMotifs.\nSeveral themes recur in Lynch's work. Le Blanc and Odell write, \"his films are so packed with motifs, recurrent characters, images, compositions and techniques that you could view his entire output as one large jigsaw puzzle of ideas\". One of the key themes they note is the usage of dreams and dreamlike imagery and structure, something they relate to the \"surrealist ethos\" of relying \"on the subconscious to provide visual drive\". This can be seen in Merrick's dream of his mother in \"The Elephant Man\", Cooper's dreams of the red room in \"Twin Peaks\" and the \"dreamlike logic\" of the narratives of \"Eraserhead\", \"Mulholland Drive\" and \"Inland Empire\". Of his attitude to dreams, Lynch has said, \"Waking dreams are the ones that are important, the ones that come when I'm quietly sitting in a chair, letting my mind wander. When you sleep, you don't control your dream. I like to dive into a dream world that I've made or discovered; a world I choose\u00a0... [You can't really get others to experience it, but] right there is the power of cinema.\" His films are known for their use of magic realism. The motif of dreams is closely linked to his recurring use of drones, real-world sounds and musical styles.\nAnother of Lynch's prominent themes is industry, with repeated imagery of \"the clunk of machinery, the power of pistons, shadows of oil drills pumping, screaming woodmills and smoke billowing factories\", as seen in the industrial wasteland in \"Eraserhead\", the factories in \"The Elephant Man\", the sawmill in \"Twin Peaks\" and the lawnmower in \"The Straight Story\". Of his interest in such things, Lynch has said, \"It makes me feel good to see giant machinery, you know, working: dealing with molten metal. And I like fire and smoke. And the sounds are so powerful. It's just big stuff. It means that things are being made, and I really like that.\"\nAnother theme is the dark underbelly of violent criminal activity in a society, such as Frank Booth's gang in \"Blue Velvet\" and the cocaine smugglers in \"Twin Peaks\". The idea of deformity is also found in several of Lynch's films, from \"The Elephant Man\" to the deformed baby in \"Eraserhead\", as well as death from head wounds, found in most of Lynch's films. Other imagery common in Lynch's works includes flickering electricity or lights, fire, and stages upon which a singer performs, often surrounded by drapery.\nExcept \"The Elephant Man\" and \"Dune\", which are set in Victorian London and a fictitious galaxy respectively, all of Lynch's films are set in the United States, and he has said, \"I like certain things about America and it gives me ideas. When I go around and I see things, it sparks little stories, or little characters pop out, so it just feels right to me to, you know, make American films.\" A number of his works, including \"Blue Velvet\", \"Twin Peaks\" and \"Lost Highway\", are intentionally reminiscent of 1950s American culture despite being set in later decades of the 20th century. Lynch has said, \"It was a fantastic decade in a lot of ways\u00a0... there was something in the air that is not there any more at all. It was such a great feeling, and not just because I was a kid. It was a really hopeful time, and things were going up instead of going down. You got the feeling you could do anything. The future was bright. Little did we know we were laying the groundwork for a disastrous future.\"\nLynch also tends to feature his leading female actors in \"split\" roles, so that many of his female characters have multiple, fractured identities. This practice began with his casting Sheryl Lee as both Laura Palmer and her cousin Maddy Ferguson in \"Twin Peaks\" and continued in his later works. In \"Lost Highway\", Patricia Arquette plays the dual role of Renee Madison/Alice Wakefield; in \"Mulholland Drive\" Naomi Watts plays Diane Selwyn/Betty Elms and Laura Harring plays Camilla Rhodes/Rita; in \"Inland Empire\" Laura Dern plays Nikki Grace/Susan Blue. The numerous alternative versions of lead characters and fragmented timelines may echo and/or reference the many worlds interpretation of quantum physics and perhaps Lynch's broader interest in quantum mechanics. Some have suggested that Lynch's love for Hitchcock's \"Vertigo\", which employs a split lead character (the Judy Barton and Madeleine Elster characters, both portrayed by Kim Novak) may have influenced this aspect of his work.\nHis films frequently feature characters with supernatural or omnipotent qualities. They can be seen as physical manifestations of various concepts, such as hatred or fear. Examples include The Man Inside the Planet in \"Eraserhead\", BOB in \"Twin Peaks\", The Mystery Man in \"Lost Highway\", The Bum in \"Mulholland Drive\", and The Phantom in \"Inland Empire\". Lynch approaches his characters and plots in a way that steeps them in a dream state rather than reality.\nRecurring collaborators.\nLynch is also widely noted for his collaborations with various production artists and composers on his films and other productions. He frequently works with Angelo Badalamenti to compose music for his productions, former wife Mary Sweeney as a film editor, casting director Johanna Ray, and cast members Harry Dean Stanton, Jack Nance, Kyle MacLachlan, Naomi Watts, Isabella Rossellini, Grace Zabriskie, and Laura Dern.\nOther work.\nPainting.\nLynch first trained as a painter, and although he is now better known as a filmmaker, he has continued to paint. Lynch has stated that \"all my paintings are organic, violent comedies. They have to be violently done and primitive and crude, and to achieve that I try to let nature paint more than I paint.\" Many of his works are very dark in color, and Lynch has said this is because\nMany of his works also contain letters and words added to the painting. He explains:\nLynch considers the 20th-century Irish-born British artist Francis Bacon to be his \"number one kinda hero painter\", stating that \"Normally I only like a couple of years of a painter's work, but I like everything of Bacon's. The guy, you know, had the stuff.\"\nLynch was the subject of a major art retrospective at the Fondation Cartier, Paris from March 3 \u2013 May 27, 2007. The show was titled \"The Air is on Fire\" and included numerous paintings, photographs, drawings, alternative films and sound work. New site-specific art installations were created specially for the exhibition. A series of events accompanied the exhibition including live performances and concerts.\nHis alma mater, the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, presented an exhibition of his work, entitled \"The Unified Field\", which opened on September 12, 2014 and ended in January 2015.\nLynch is represented by Kayne Griffin Corcoran in Los Angeles, and has been exhibiting his paintings, drawings, and photography with the gallery since 2011.\nHis favorite photographers include William Eggleston (\"The Red Ceiling\"), Joel-Peter Witkin, and Diane Arbus.\nMusic.\nLynch has also been involved in a number of music projects, many of them related to his films. His album genres switch mainly between experimental rock, ambient soundscapes and, most recently, avant-garde electropop music. Most notably he produced and wrote lyrics for Julee Cruise's first two albums, \"Floating into the Night\" (1989) and \"The Voice of Love\" (1993), in collaboration with Angelo Badalamenti who composed the music and also produced. Lynch also worked on the 1998 Jocelyn Montgomery album \"Lux Vivens (Living Light), The Music of Hildegard von Bingen\". For his own productions, he composed music for \"Wild at Heart\", \"Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me\", \"Mulholland Drive\", and \"Rabbits\". In 2001, he released \"BlueBob\", a rock album performed by Lynch and John Neff. The album is notable for Lynch's unusual guitar playing style. He plays \"upside down and backwards, like a lap guitar\", and relies heavily on effects pedals. Most recently Lynch composed several pieces for \"Inland Empire\", including two songs, \"Ghost of Love\" and \"Walkin' on the Sky\", in which he makes his public debut as a singer. In 2009, his new book-CD set \"\" was released. In 2008, he started his own record label called David Lynch MC which first released \"Fox Bat Strategy: A Tribute to Dave Jaurequi\" in early 2009. In August 2009, it was announced that he was releasing Afghani/American singer Ariana Delawari's \"Lion of Panjshir\" album in conjunction with Manimal Vinyl record company.\nIn November 2010, Lynch released two electropop music singles, \"Good Day Today\" and \"I Know\", through the independent British label Sunday Best Recordings. Describing why he created them, he stated that \"I was just sitting and these notes came and then I went down and started working with Dean [Hurley, his engineer] and then these few notes, 'I want to have a good day, today' came and the song was built around that\". The singles were followed by an album, \"Crazy Clown Time\", which was released in November 2011 and described as an \"electronic blues album\". The songs were sung by Lynch, with guest vocals on one track by Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, and composed and performed by Lynch and Dean Hurley. All or most of the songs for \"Crazy Clown Time\" were put into art-music videos, Lynch directing the title song's video. The \"Crazy Clown Time\" song and video are a fantastic minimalistic parody of hip-hop music and videos.\nOn September 29, 2011, Lynch released \"This Train\" with vocalist and long-time musical collaborator Chrysta Bell on the La Rose Noire label. The 11-song album was produced by Lynch and co-written primarily by Lynch and Chrysta Bell. It includes the song \"Polish Poem\" which is featured on the \"Inland Empire\" soundtrack. The musical partnership also yielded a 5- song EP entitled \"Somewhere in the Nowhere\", released October 7, 2016, on Meta Hari Records.\nLynch's third studio album, \"The Big Dream\", was released in 2013 and included the single \"I'm Waiting Here\", with Swedish singer-songwriter Lykke Li. \"The Big Dream\"s release was preceded by \"TBD716\", an enigmatic 43-second video featured on Lynch's YouTube and Vine accounts.\nFor Record Store Day 2014, David Lynch released \"The Big Dream Remix EP\" which featured four songs from his album remixed by various artists. This included the track \"Are You Sure\" remixed by Bastille. The band Bastille have been known to take inspiration from David Lynch's work for their songs and music videos, the main one being their song \"Laura Palmer\" which is influenced by Lynch's television show \"Twin Peaks\".\nOn November 2, 2018, a collaborative album by Lynch and Angelo Badalamenti, titled \"Thought Gang\", was released on vinyl and on compact disc. The album was recorded around 1993 but was unreleased at the time. Two tracks from the album already appeared on the soundtrack from the 1992 movie 'Twin Peaks: Fire walk with me' and three other tracks were used for the 'Twin Peaks' TV series in 2017.\nIn May 2019, Lynch provided guest vocals on the track \"Fire is Coming\" by Flying Lotus. He also co-wrote the track that appears on Flying Lotus' album \"Flamagra\". A video accompanying the song was released on April 17, 2019.\nDesign.\nLynch designed and constructed furniture for his 1997 film \"Lost Highway\", notably the small table in the Madison house and the VCR case. In April 1997, he presented a furniture collection at the prestigious Milan Furniture Fair in Italy. \"Design and music, art and architecture \u2013 they all belong together.\"\nWorking with designer Raphael Navot, architectural agency Enia and light designer Thierry Dreyfus, Lynch has conceived and designed a nightclub in Paris. \"Silencio\" opened in October 2011, and is a private members' club although is free to the public after midnight. Patrons have access to concerts, films and other performances by artists and guests. Inspired by the club of the same name in his 2001 film \"Mulholland Drive\", the underground space consists of a series of rooms, each dedicated to a certain purpose or atmosphere. \"Silencio is something dear to me. I wanted to create an intimate space where all the arts could come together. There won't be a Warhol-like guru, but it will be open to celebrated artists of all disciplines to come here to programme or create what they want.\"\nLiterature.\nIn 2006, Lynch authored a short book describing his creative processes, stories from throughout his career, and the benefits he had realized through his practice of Transcendental Meditation called \"Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, Consciousness, and Creativity\". He describes the metaphor behind the title in the introduction:\nThe book weaves a non-linear autobiography with descriptions of Lynch's cognitive experiences during Transcendental Meditation. All author's royalties will be donated to the David Lynch Foundation.\nTogether with Kristine McKenna, Lynch, in June 2018, published the book \"Room to Dream\". The book is a hybrid of biography and memoir. The book gives the reader a look into his personal and creative life through his own words and through those of his colleagues, family and friends.\nAwards and nominations.\nAcademy Awards\nBritish Academy Film Awards\nCannes Film Festival\nDirectors Guild Award\nPrimetime Emmy Awards\nGolden Globes\nIndependent Spirit Awards\nVenice Film Festival\nWriters Guild of America Award\nSaturn Awards\nIn 2017, Lynch was awarded The Edward MacDowell Medal by The MacDowell Colony for outstanding contributions to American culture.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nLynch has had several long-term relationships. In 1967, he married Peggy Lentz in Chicago, Illinois. They had one child, Jennifer Lynch, born in 1968, who is a film director. They filed for divorce in 1974. On June 21, 1977, Lynch married Mary Fisk, and the couple had one child, Austin Jack Lynch, born in 1982. They divorced in 1987. Lynch later developed a relationship with Mary Sweeney, with whom he had one son, Riley Sweeney Lynch, born in 1992. Sweeney also worked as Lynch's longtime film editor/producer and co-wrote and produced \"The Straight Story\". The two married in May 2006, but filed for divorce that June. In 2009, Lynch married actress Emily Stofle, who appeared in his 2006 film \"Inland Empire\" as well as the . The couple have one child, Lula Boginia Lynch, born in 2012.\nPolitical views.\nLynch has said that he is \"not a political person\" and that politics is \"something [he] know[s] little about\". However, in the 1990s he expressed admiration for former US President Ronald Reagan, stating that \"I mostly liked that he carried a wind of old Hollywood, of a cowboy.\" Describing his political philosophy in 2006, he stated, \"at that time, I thought of myself as a libertarian. I believed in next to zero government. And I still would lean toward no government and not so many rules, except for traffic lights and things like this. I really believe in traffic regulations.\" Lynch continued to state that \"I'm a Democrat now. And I've always been a Democrat, really. But I don't like the Democrats a lot, either, because I'm a smoker, and I think a lot of the Democrats have come up with these rules for non-smoking.\" He endorsed the center-left Natural Law Party in the 2000 presidential election and later stated that he would vote for Democratic incumbent Barack Obama in the 2012 presidential election.\nIn the 2016 United States presidential election, he endorsed Bernie Sanders, whom he described as \"for the people.\" He voted for Sanders in the 2016 Democratic Primary and for Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson in the general election. In a June 2018 interview with \"The Guardian\", he stated that Donald Trump could go down as \"one of the greatest presidents in history because he has disrupted the [country] so much. No one is able to counter this guy in an intelligent way.\" He added: \"Our so-called leaders can't take the country forward, can't get anything done. Like children, they are. Trump has shown all this.\" The interviewer clarified that \"while Trump may not be doing a good job himself, Lynch thinks, he is opening up a space where other outsiders might.\" At a rally later that month Trump read out sections from the interview claiming Lynch as a supporter (though he misspoke, saying, \"David Lynch could go down as one of the greatest presidents in history\"). Lynch later clarified on his official Facebook page that the quote was taken out of context and stated that Trump \"[would] not have a chance to go down in history as a great president\" if he continued on the course of \"causing suffering and division\", advising him to \"treat all the people as you would like to be treated\".\nIn one of his weather report videos, Lynch expressed support for Black Lives Matter protests.\nTranscendental Meditation.\nLynch advocates the use of Transcendental Meditation in bringing peace to the world. He was initiated into Transcendental Meditation in July 1973, and has practiced the technique consistently since then. Lynch says he met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the founder of the TM movement, for the first time in 1975 at the Spiritual Regeneration Movement center in Los Angeles, California. He reportedly became close with the Maharishi during a month-long \"Millionaire's Enlightenment Course\" held in 2003, the fee for which was 1\u00a0million.\nIn July 2005, he launched the David Lynch Foundation for Consciousness-Based Education and Peace, established to help finance scholarships for students in middle and high schools who are interested in learning the Transcendental Meditation technique and to fund research on the technique and its effects on learning. Together with John Hagelin and Fred Travis, a brain researcher from Maharishi University of Management (MUM), Lynch promoted his vision on college campuses with a tour that began in September 2005. Lynch is on the board of trustees of MUM and has hosted an annual \"David Lynch Weekend for World Peace and Meditation\" there since 2005.\nLynch was working for the building and establishment of seven buildings, in which 8,000 salaried people would practice advanced meditation techniques, \"pumping peace for the world\". He estimates the cost at US$7 billion. As of December 2005, he had spent US$400,000 of personal money, and raised US$1\u00a0million in donations. In December 2006, \"The New York Times\" reported that he continued to have that goal. Lynch's book, \"Catching the Big Fish\" (Tarcher/Penguin 2006), discusses the impact of the Transcendental Meditation technique on his creative process. Lynch attended the funeral of the Maharishi in India in 2008. He told a reporter, \"In life, he revolutionised the lives of millions of people.\u00a0... In 20, 50, 500 years there will be millions of people who will know and understand what the Maharishi has done.\" In 2009, he went to India to film interviews with people who knew the Maharishi as part of a biographical documentary.\nIn 2009, Lynch organized a benefit concert at Radio City Music Hall for the David Lynch Foundation. On April 4, 2009, the \"Change Begins Within\" concert featured Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Donovan, Sheryl Crow, Eddie Vedder, Moby, Bettye LaVette, Ben Harper, and Mike Love of the Beach Boys. \"David Wants to Fly\", released in May 2010, is a documentary by German filmmaker David Sieveking \"that follows the path of his professional idol, David Lynch, into the world of Transcendental Meditation (TM)\". In this very personal documentary Sieveking deals critically with the Transcendental Meditation. At the end of the film, it becomes clear that Sieveking rated the engagement of his former idol Lynch as problematic.\nAn independent project starring Lynch called \"Beyond The Noise: My Transcendental Meditation Journey\", directed by film student Dana Farley, who has severe dyslexia and attention deficit disorder, was shown at film festivals in 2011, including the Marbella Film Festival. Filmmaker Kevin Sean Michaels is one of the producers. In 2013 Lynch wrote: \"Transcendental Meditation leads to a beautiful, peaceful revolution. A change from suffering and negativity to happiness and a life more and more free of any problems.\"\nIn 2019, British contemporary artist Alexander de Cadenet interviewed David Lynch about his views on enlightenment and Transcendental Meditation. Lynch commented about the technique saying; \"Here's an experience that utilizes the full brain, that's what it's for; it's for enlightenment, for higher states of consciousness culminating in the highest state of unity consciousness.\"\nWebsite.\nLynch designed his personal website, a site exclusive to paying members, where he posts short videos and his absurdist series \"Dumbland\", plus interviews and other items. The site also featured a daily weather report, where Lynch gives a brief description of the weather in Los Angeles, where he resides. Until June 2010, this weather report (usually no longer than 30\u00a0seconds) was also being broadcast on his personal YouTube channel, \"David Lynch \u2013 Daily Weather Report\". An absurd ringtone (\"I like to kill deer\") from the website was a common sound bite on \"The Howard Stern Show\" in early 2006.\nLynch is a coffee drinker and has his own line of special organic blends available for purchase on his website as well as in Whole Foods. Called \"David Lynch Signature Cup\", the coffee has been advertised via flyers included with several recent Lynch-related DVD releases, including \"Inland Empire\" and the Gold Box edition of \"Twin Peaks\". The possibly self-mocking tag-line for the brand is \"It's all in the beans\u00a0... and I'm just full of beans.\" This is also a quote of a line said by Justin Theroux's character in \"Inland Empire\".\nArchive.\nThe moving image collection of David Lynch is held at the Academy Film Archive, which has preserved two of his student films."}
{"id": "7892", "revid": "4018503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7892", "title": "David Cronenberg", "text": "David Paul Cronenberg (born March 15, 1943) is a Canadian film director, screenwriter, and actor. He is one of the principal originators of what is commonly known as the body horror genre, with his films exploring visceral bodily transformation, infection, technology, and the intertwining of the psychological with the physical. In the first third of his career he explored these themes mostly through horror and science fiction films such as \"Scanners\" (1981) and \"Videodrome\" (1983), although his work has since expanded beyond these genres.\nCronenberg's films have polarized critics and audiences alike; he has earned critical acclaim and has sparked controversy for his depictions of gore and violence. \"The Village Voice\" called him \"the most audacious and challenging narrative director in the English-speaking world\". His films have won numerous awards, including, for \"Crash\", the Special Jury Prize at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival, a unique award that is distinct from the Jury Prize as it is not given annually, but only at the request of the official jury, who in this case gave the award \"for originality, for daring, and for audacity\".\nEarly life.\nBorn in Toronto, Ontario, Cronenberg is the son of Esther (\"n\u00e9e\" Sumberg), a musician, and Milton Cronenberg, a writer and editor. He was raised in a \"middle-class progressive Jewish family.\" His father was born in Baltimore, Maryland, and his mother was born in Toronto; all of his Jewish grandparents were from Lithuania. They kept the Cronenberg household full of a wide variety of books, and Cronenberg's father tried to introduce him to art films such as \"The Seventh Seal\", although at the time, Cronenberg was more interested in western and pirate films, showing a particular affinity for those featuring Burt Lancaster.\nA voracious reader from an early age, Cronenberg started off enjoying science fiction magazines like \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", \"Galaxy\", and \"Astounding\", where he first encountered authors who would prove influential on his own work, including Ray Bradbury and Isaac Asimov, although he wouldn't encounter his primary influence, Phillip K. Dick, until much later. Cronenberg also read comic books, noting his favorites were \"Tarzan\", \"Little Lulu\", \"Uncle Scrooge\", \"Blackhawk\", \"Plastic Man\", \"Superman\" and the original Fawcett Comics version of \"Captain Marvel\", later known as \"Shazam\". Although as an adult, Cronenberg feels superhero films are artistically limited, he maintains a fondness for \"Captain Marvel\"/\"Shazam\", criticizing how he feels the character been neglected. Cronenberg also read horror comics published by EC, which in contrast to the others, he described as \"scary and bizarre and violent and nasty\u2014the ones your mother didn\u2019t want you to have.\"\nEarly films that later proved influential on Cronenberg's career include standard avant-garde, horror, science fiction, and thriller films, such as \"Un Chien Andalou\", \"Vampyr\", \"War of the Worlds\", \"Freaks\", \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\", \"Alphaville\", \"Performance\", and \"Duel\". However, Cronenberg has also cited less obvious films as influences, including comedies like \"The Bed Sitting Room\", as well as Disney cartoons such as \"Bambi\" and \"Dumbo\". Cronenberg said he found these two Disney animated films, as well as Universal's live-action \"Blue Lagoon\", \"terrifying\" which influenced his approach to horror. Cronenberg went on to say that \"Bambi\" was the \"first important film\" he ever saw, citing the moment when Bambi's mother died as particularly powerful. Cronenberg even wished to screen \"Bambi\" as part of a museum exhibition of his influences, but Disney refused him permission. In terms of conventional horror films that frightened him, Cronenberg cited \"Don't Look Now\".\nCronenberg began writing as a child and did so constantly, mainly working in the writing science fiction genre. He attended high school at Harbord Collegiate Institute and North Toronto Collegiate Institute. A keen interest in science, especially botany and lepidopterology, led him to enter the Honours Science program at the University of Toronto in 1963, but he switched to Honours English Language and Literature later in his first year.\nCronenberg's fascination with the film \"Winter Kept Us Warm\" (1966), by classmate David Secter, sparked his interest in film. He began frequenting film camera rental houses, learning the art of filmmaking, and made two 16mm films (\"Transfer\" and \"From the Drain\"). Inspired by the New York underground film scene, he founded the Toronto Film Co-op with Iain Ewing and Ivan Reitman. After taking a year off to travel in Europe, he returned to Canada in 1967 and graduated from University College of the University of Toronto at the top of his class.\nCareer.\nAfter two short sketch films and two short art-house features (the black-and-white \"Stereo\" and the colour \"Crimes of the Future\") Cronenberg went into partnership with Ivan Reitman. The Canadian government provided financing for his films throughout the 1970s. During this period, he focused on his signature \"body horror\" films such as \"Shivers\" and \"Rabid\", the latter of which provided pornographic actress Marilyn Chambers with work in a different genre, although Cronenberg's first choice for the role had been a then little-known Sissy Spacek. \"Rabid\" was a breakthrough with international distributors, and his next two horror features, \"The Brood\" and \"Scanners\", gained stronger support. Even at this stage however, Cronenberg showed variety, by making \"Fast Company\" between \"The Brood\" and \"Rabid\", a project reflecting his interest in car racing and bike gangs.\nCronenberg has cited William S. Burroughs and Vladimir Nabokov as influences. Perhaps the best example of a film that straddles the line between his works of personal chaos and psychological confusion is Cronenberg's 1991 \"adaptation\" of \"Naked Lunch\" (1959), his literary hero William S. Burroughs' most controversial book. The novel was considered \"unfilmable\", and Cronenberg acknowledged that a straight translation into film would \"cost 400 million dollars and be banned in every country in the world\". Instead\u2014much like in his earlier film, \"Videodrome\"\u2014he consistently blurred the lines between what appeared to be reality and what appeared to be hallucinations brought on by the main character's drug addiction. Some of the book's \"moments\" (as well as incidents loosely based upon Burroughs' life) are presented in this manner within the film. Cronenberg stated that while writing the screenplay for \"Naked Lunch\" (1991), he felt a moment of synergy with Burroughs' writing style. He felt the connection between his screenwriting style and Burroughs' prose style was so strong, that he jokingly remarked that should Burroughs pass on, \"I'll just write his next book.\"\nCronenberg has said that his films should be seen \"from the point of view of the disease\", and that in \"Shivers\", for example, he identifies with the characters \"after\" they become infected with the anarchic parasites. Disease and disaster, in Cronenberg's work, are less problems to be overcome than agents of personal transformation. Of his characters' transformations, Cronenberg said, \"But because of our necessity to impose our own structure of perception on things we look on ourselves as being relatively stable. But, in fact, when I look at a person I see this maelstrom of organic, chemical and electron chaos; volatility and instability, shimmering; and the ability to change and transform and transmute.\" Similarly, in \"Crash\" (1996), people who have been injured in car crashes attempt to view their ordeal as \"a fertilizing rather than a destructive event\". In 2005, Cronenberg publicly disagreed with Paul Haggis' choice of the same name for the latter's Oscar-winning film \"Crash\" (2004), arguing that it was \"very disrespectful\" to the \"important and seminal\" J.G. Ballard novel on which Cronenberg's film was based.\nAside from \"The Dead Zone\" (1983) and \"The Fly\" (1986), Cronenberg has not generally worked within the world of big-budget, mainstream Hollywood filmmaking, although he has had occasional near misses. At one stage he was considered by George Lucas as a possible director for \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983) but was passed over. Cronenberg also worked for nearly a year on a version of \"Total Recall\" (1990), but experienced \"creative differences\" with producers Dino De Laurentiis and Ronald Shusett; a different version of the film was eventually made by Paul Verhoeven. A fan of Philip K. Dick's, author of \"We Can Remember it For You Wholesale\", the short story upon which the film was based, Cronenberg related in the 1992 biography/overview of his work, \"Cronenberg on Cronenberg\", that his dissatisfaction with what he envisioned the film to be and what it ended up being pained him so greatly that for a time, he suffered a migraine just thinking about it, akin to a needle piercing his eye.\nIn the late 1990s, Cronenberg was announced as director of a sequel to another Verhoeven film, \"Basic Instinct\" (1992), but this also fell through. His thriller \"A History of Violence\" (2005) is one of his highest budgeted and most accessible to date. He has said that the decision to direct it was influenced by his having had to defer some of his salary on the low-budgeted \"Spider\" (2002), but it was one of his most critically acclaimed films to date, along with \"Eastern Promises\" (2007), a film about the struggle of one man to gain power in the Russian Mafia.\nCronenberg has collaborated with composer Howard Shore on all of his films since \"The Brood\" (1979), (see List of noted film director and composer collaborations) with the exception of \"The Dead Zone\" (1983), which was scored by Michael Kamen. Other regular collaborators include actor Robert Silverman, art director Carol Spier (also his sister) sound editor Bryan Day, film editor Ronald Sanders, his sister, costume designer Denise Cronenberg, and, from 1979 until 1988, cinematographer Mark Irwin. In 2008, Cronenberg directed Howard Shore's first opera, \"The Fly\".\nSince \"Dead Ringers\" (1988), Cronenberg has worked with cinematographer Peter Suschitzky on each of his films (see List of film director and cinematographer collaborations). Suschitzky was the director of photography for \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980), and Cronenberg remarked that Suschitzky's work in that film \"was the only one of those movies that actually looked good\", which was a motivating factor to work with him on \"Dead Ringers\".\nAlthough Cronenberg has worked with a number of Hollywood stars, he remains a staunchly Canadian filmmaker, with nearly all of his films (including major studio vehicles \"The Dead Zone\" and \"The Fly\") having been filmed in his home province Ontario. Notable exceptions include \"M. Butterfly\" (1993), most of which was shot in China, \"Spider\", and \"Eastern Promises\" (2007), which were both filmed primarily in England, and \"A Dangerous Method\" (2011), which was filmed in Germany and Austria. \"Rabid\" and \"Shivers\" were shot in and around Montreal. Most of his films have been at least partially financed by Telefilm Canada, and Cronenberg, a vocal supporter of government-backed film projects, has said: \"Every country needs [a system of government grants] to have a national cinema in the face of Hollywood\".\nCronenberg has also appeared as an actor in other directors' films. Most of his roles are cameo appearances, as in the films \"Into the Night\" (1985), \"Blood and Donuts\" (1995), \"To Die For\" (1995), and \"Jason X\" (2002) and the television series \"Alias\", but on occasion he has played major roles, as in \"Nightbreed\" (1990) and \"Last Night\" (1998). He has not had major roles in any of his own films, but he did put in a brief appearance as a gynecologist in \"The Fly\"; he can also be glimpsed among the sex-crazed hordes in \"Shivers\"; he can be heard as an unseen car-pound attendant in \"Crash\"; his hands can be glimpsed in \"eXistenZ\" (1999); and he appeared as a stand-in for James Woods in \"Videodrome\" for shots in which Woods' character wore a helmet that covered his head.\nIn 2008, Cronenberg realized two extra-cinematographic projects: the exhibition \"Chromosomes\" at the Rome Film Fest, and the opera \"The Fly\" at the LaOpera in Los Angeles and Theatre Ch\u00e2telet in Paris. In July 2010, Cronenberg completed production on \"A Dangerous Method\" (2011), an adaptation of Christopher Hampton's play \"The Talking Cure\", starring Keira Knightley, Michael Fassbender, and frequent collaborator Viggo Mortensen. The film was produced by independent British producer Jeremy Thomas.\nIn 2012, his film \"Cosmopolis\" competed for the Palme d'Or at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival.\nIn the October 2011 edition of \"Rue Morgue\", Cronenberg stated that he has written a companion piece to his 1986 remake of \"The Fly\", which he would like to direct if given the chance. He has stated that it is not a traditional sequel, but rather a \"parallel story\".\nFor a time it appeared that, as \"Eastern Promises\" producer Paul Webster told Screen International, a sequel is in the works that would reunite the key team of Cronenberg, Steven Knight, and Viggo Mortensen. The film was to be made by Webster's new production company \"Shoebox Films\" in collaboration with Focus Features, and shot in early 2013. However, in 2012, Cronenberg commented that the \"Eastern Promises\" sequel had fallen through due to budget disagreement with Focus Features.\nFilming for Cronenberg's next film, a satire drama entitled \"Maps to the Stars\" (2014)\u2014with Julianne Moore, Mia Wasikowska, John Cusack, and Robert Pattinson\u2014began on July 8, 2013 in Toronto, Ontario and Los Angeles. This was the first time Cronenberg filmed in the United States.\nOn June 26, 2014, Cronenberg's short film \"The Nest\" was published on YouTube. The film was commissioned for \"David Cronenberg \u2013 The Exhibition\" at EYE Film Institute in Amsterdam and was available on YouTube for the duration of the exhibition, until September 14, 2014. Also in 2014, Cronenberg published his first novel, \"Consumed\".\nIn a May 2016 interview, Viggo Mortensen revealed that Cronenberg is considering retiring due to difficulty financing his film projects.\nPersonal life.\nCronenberg lives in Toronto. He married his first wife, Margaret Hindson, in 1972: their seven-year marriage ended in 1979 amidst personal and professional differences. They had one daughter, Cassandra Cronenberg. His second wife was film editor Carolyn Zeifman, to whom he was married until her death in 2017. The couple met on the set of \"Rabid\" while she was working as a production assistant. They have two children, Caitlin and Brandon. In the book \"Cronenberg on Cronenberg\" (1992), he revealed that \"The Brood\" was inspired by events that occurred during the unraveling of his first marriage, which caused both Cronenberg and his daughter Cassandra a great deal of turmoil. The character Nola Carveth, mother of the brood, is based on Cassandra's mother. Cronenberg said that he found the shooting of the climactic scene, in which Nola was strangled by her husband, to be \"very satisfying\".\nIn a September 2013 interview, Cronenberg revealed that Roman Catholic film director Martin Scorsese admitted to him that he was intrigued by Cronenberg's early work but was subsequently \"terrified\" to meet him in person. Cronenberg responded to Scorsese: \"You're the guy who made \"Taxi Driver\" and you're afraid to meet me?\" In the same interview, Cronenberg identified as an atheist. \"Anytime I've tried to imagine squeezing myself into the box of any particular religion, I find it claustrophobic and oppressive,\" Cronenberg elaborated. \"I think atheism is an acceptance of what is real.\" In the same interview, Cronenberg revealed that it depends on the \"time of day\" as to whether or not he is afraid of death. He further stated that he is not concerned about posthumous representations of his film work: \"It wouldn't disturb me to think that my work would just sink beneath the waves without trace and that would be it. So what? It doesn't bother me.\"\nIn \"Cronenberg on Cronenberg\", the director further elaborated that he was raised in a secular Jewish home, and while he and his family had no disdain towards any religion, such matters were not discussed. In the same book, Cronenberg said that in his teens he went through a phase where he wondered about the existence of God, but ultimately came to the conclusion that the God concept was developed to cope with the fear of death. In a 2007 interview, Cronenberg explained the role atheism plays in his work. He stated, \"I'm interested in saying, 'Let us discuss the existential question. We are all going to die, that is the end of all consciousness. There is no afterlife. There is no God. Now what do we do.' That's the point where it starts getting interesting to me.\"\nIn Cronenberg's later films (e.g. \"A History of Violence\", \"Eastern Promises\" and \"A Dangerous Method\") openly religious characters become more common. During an interview for \"A History of Violence\", Cronenberg even chose to identify as a materialist rather than an atheist, stating, \"I\u2019m not an atheist, but for me to turn away from any aspect of the human body to me is a philosophical betrayal. And there\u2019s a lot of art and religion whose whole purpose is to turn away from the human body. I feel in my art that my mandate is to not do that.\"\nIn a separate 2013 interview, Cronenberg discussed the role religion plays in his films, using \"Eastern Promises\" as the main example:\nI'm an atheist but not all my characters are atheists. So it's true that I don't think about God ever as part of my life or anything. But if you're a dramatist and you are working with characters who come from a particular culture, you have to accept their understanding of life, and with passion. So the Nikolai character, I'm pretty sure he believes in God and most of the other characters in the movie do too. Some of them are Muslim, some of them are Eastern Orthodox, and that's a part of their life, a part of their understanding of suffering. Because everybody in life suffers but not everybody thinks of that in religious terms. These people do. And they think of suffering as a way to salvation, also in religious terms. I am their God really, as I am creating them; that's religious in itself. I am a very hardcore atheist believe me but you become like an actor really, as a director or a writer. You must take on the character as that character is and believe in it as you're playing it. To allow that character to exist as he would exist. That's really what it's all about, so I have no problem with characters who are religious and believe in God. I would have a problem if that was the point of the whole story because that bores me and I just don't have any emotional or intellectual respect for it, frankly.\nAwards and recognition.\nCronenberg has appeared on various \"Greatest Director\" lists. In 2004, Science Fiction magazine \"Strange Horizons\" named him the second greatest director in the history of the genre, ahead of better known directors such as Steven Spielberg, James Cameron, Jean-Luc Godard, and Ridley Scott. In the same year, \"The Guardian\" listed him 9th on their list of \"The world's 40 best directors\". In 2007, Total Film named him as the 17th greatest director of all-time. Film professor Charles Derry, in his overview of the horror genre \"Dark Dreams\", called the director one of the most important in his field, and that \"no discussion of contemporary horror film can conclude without reference to the films of David Cronenberg.\"\nCronenberg received the Special Jury Prize at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival for \"Crash\". In 1999, he was inducted onto Canada's Walk of Fame, awarded the Silver Bear Award at the 49th Berlin International Film Festival. and that November received the Governor General's Performing Arts Award, Canada's highest honour in the performing arts.\nIn 2002, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, and was promoted to Companion of the Order of Canada (the order's highest rank) in 2014. In 2006 he was awarded the Cannes Film Festival's lifetime achievement award, the Carrosse d'Or. In 2009 Cronenberg received the L\u00e9gion d'honneur from the government of France. The following year Cronenberg was named an honorary patron of the University Philosophical Society, Trinity College, Dublin. In 2012, he received the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal.\nThe opening of the \"David Cronenberg: Evolution\" Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) exhibition occurred on October 30, 2013. Held at the TIFF Bell Lightbox venue, the exhibition paid tribute to the director's entire filmmaking career and the festival's promotional material referred to Cronenberg as \"one of Canada's most prolific and iconic filmmakers\". The exhibition was shown internationally following the conclusion of the TIFF showing on January 19, 2014.\nIn 2014, he was made a Member of the Order of Ontario in recognition for being \"Canada's most celebrated internationally acclaimed filmmaker\".\nIn April 2018, it was announced that Cronenberg would receive the honorary Golden Lion at the 75th Venice International Film Festival.\nAcademy of Canadian Cinema and Television.\nBest Picture\nBest Director\nBest Screenplay"}
{"id": "7893", "revid": "1011579945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7893", "title": "Dale Earnhardt", "text": "Ralph Dale Earnhardt Sr. (; April 29, 1951 \u2013 February 18, 2001) was an American professional stock car driver and team owner, who raced from 1975 to 2001 in the former NASCAR Winston Cup Series (now called the NASCAR Cup Series), most notably driving the No. 3 Chevrolet for Richard Childress Racing. The third child of racing driver Ralph Earnhardt and Martha Earnhardt, he began his career in 1975 in the World 600. Earnhardt won a total of 76 Winston Cup races over the course of his 3 decade career, including four Winston 500s (1990, 1994, 1999, and 2000) and the 1998 Daytona 500. He also earned seven Winston Cup championships, a record held with Richard Petty and Jimmie Johnson. His aggressive driving style earned him the nicknames \"The Intimidator\", \"The Man in Black\", and \"Ironhead\". He is regarded as one of the greatest drivers in NASCAR history. \nOn February 18, 2001, Earnhardt died in a sudden last-lap crash during the Daytona 500, an event that is regarded in the racing industry as being a crucial moment in improving safety in all aspects of car racing, especially NASCAR. Earnhardt has been inducted into numerous halls of fame, including the NASCAR Hall of Fame inaugural class in 2010.\nBiography.\nEarly and personal life.\nOf German ancestry, Dale Earnhardt was born on April 29, 1951, in the Charlotte suburb of Kannapolis, North Carolina, as the third child of Martha (\"n\u00e9e\" Coleman) and Ralph Earnhardt. Earnhardt's father was one of the best short-track drivers in North Carolina at the time and won his first and only NASCAR Sportsman Championship in 1956 at Greenville Pickens Speedway in Greenville, South Carolina. In 1963 at the age of 12, Dale Earnhardt secretly drove his father\u2019s car in one of his races and had a near victory against one of his father closest competitors. In 1972, he raced his father at Metrolina Speedway in a race with cars from semi mod and sportsman divisions. Although Ralph did not want his son to pursue a career as a race car driver, Dale dropped out of school to pursue his dreams. Ralph was a hard teacher for Dale, and after Ralph died of a heart attack at his home in 1973 at age 45, it took many years before Dale felt as though he had finally \"proven\" himself to his father. Earnhardt had four siblings: two brothers, Danny and Randy (died 2013); and two sisters, Cathy and Kaye (died 2015)\nIn 1968, at the age of 17, Earnhardt married his first wife, Latane Brown. With her, Earnhardt fathered his first son, Kerry, a year later. Earnhardt and Brown divorced in 1970. In 1971, Earnhardt married his second wife, Brenda Gee, the daughter of NASCAR car builder Robert Gee. In his marriage with Gee, Earnhardt had two more children: a daughter, Kelley King Earnhardt, in 1972, and a son, Dale Earnhardt Jr., in 1974. Not long after Dale Jr. was born, Earnhardt and Gee divorced. Earnhardt then married his third and final wife, Teresa Houston, in 1982. She gave birth to their daughter, Taylor Nicole Earnhardt, in 1988. Taylor and her husband, Brandon Putnam, are professional rodeo performers.\nNASCAR career.\nEarly Winston Cup career (1975\u20131978).\nEarnhardt began his professional career in the NASCAR Winston Cup Series in 1975, making his points race debut at Charlotte Motor Speedway in North Carolina in the longest race on the Cup circuit\u2014the 1975 World 600. He had made his Grand National debut in 1974 in an unofficial invitational exhibition race at Metrolina Speedway, where with 8 laps to go he got under Richard Childress and spun out when battling for third. He drove the No. 8 Ed Negre Dodge Charger and finished 22nd in that race, just one spot ahead of his future car owner, Richard Childress. Earnhardt competed in eight more races until 1979.\nRod Osterlund Racing (1979\u20131980).\nWhen he joined car owner Rod Osterlund Racing in a season that included a rookie class of future stars including Earnhardt, Harry Gant, and Terry Labonte in his rookie season, Earnhardt won one race at Bristol, captured four poles, scored eleven Top 5s and seventeen Top 10s, and finished seventh in the points standings despite missing four races due to a broken collarbone, winning Rookie of the Year honors.\nDuring his sophomore season, Earnhardt, now with 20-year-old Doug Richert as his crew chief, began the season winning the Busch Clash. With wins at Atlanta, Bristol, Nashville, Martinsville, and Charlotte, Earnhardt won his first Winston Cup points championship. He is the only driver in NASCAR Winston Cup history to follow a Rookie of the Year title with a NASCAR Winston Cup Championship the next season. He was also the third driver in NASCAR history to win both the Rookie of the Year and Winston Cup Series championship, following David Pearson (1960, 1966) and Richard Petty (1959, 1964). Nine drivers have since joined this exclusive club: Rusty Wallace (1984, 1989), Alan Kulwicki (1986, 1992), Jeff Gordon (1993, 1995), Tony Stewart (1999, 2002), Matt Kenseth (2000, 2003), Kevin Harvick (2001, 2014), Kyle Busch (2005, 2015), Joey Logano (2009, 2018), and Chase Elliott (2016, 2020).\nRod Osterlund Racing, Stacy Racing, and Richard Childress Racing (1981).\n1981 would prove to be tumultuous for the defending Winston Cup champion. Sixteen races into the season, Rod Osterlund suddenly sold his team to Jim Stacy, an entrepreneur from Kentucky who entered NASCAR in 1977. After just four races, Earnhardt fell out with Stacy and left the team. Earnhardt finished out the year driving Pontiacs for Richard Childress Racing and managed to place seventh in the final points standings. Earnhardt departed RCR at the end of the season, citing a lack of chemistry.\nBud Moore Engineering (1982\u20131983).\nThe following year, at Childress's suggestion, Earnhardt joined car owner Bud Moore for the 1982 and 1983 seasons driving the No. 15 Wrangler Jeans-sponsored Ford Thunderbird (the only full-time Ford ride in his career). During the 1982 season, Earnhardt struggled. Although he won at Darlington, he failed to finish 15 races and completed the season 12th in points, the worst of his career. He also suffered a broken kneecap at Pocono Raceway when he flipped after contact with Tim Richmond. In 1983, Earnhardt rebounded and won his first of 12 Twin 125 Daytona 500 qualifying races. He won at Nashville and at Talladega, finishing eighth in the points standings.\nReturn to Richard Childress Racing (1984\u20132001).\n1984\u20131985.\nAfter the 1983 season, Earnhardt returned to Richard Childress Racing, replacing Ricky Rudd in the No. 3. Rudd went to Bud Moore's No. 15, replacing Earnhardt. Wrangler sponsored both drivers at their respective teams. During the 1984 and 1985 seasons, Earnhardt went to victory lane six times, at Talladega, Atlanta, Richmond, Bristol (twice), and Martinsville, where he finished fourth and eighth in the season standings respectively.\n1986\u20131987.\nThe 1986 season saw Earnhardt win his second career Winston Cup Championship and the first owner's championship for Richard Childress Racing. He won five races and had 16 top-fives and 23 top-10s. Earnhardt successfully defended his championship the following year, going to victory lane 11 times and winning the championship by 489 points over Bill Elliott. In the process, Earnhardt set a NASCAR modern era record of four consecutive wins and won five of the first seven races. In the 1987 season, he earned the nickname \"The Intimidator\", due in part to the 1987 Winston All-Star Race. During this race, Earnhardt was briefly forced into the infield grass but kept control of his car and returned to the track without giving up his lead. The maneuver is now referred to as the \"Pass in the Grass\", even though Earnhardt did not pass anyone while he was off the track. After The Winston, an angry fan sent Bill France Jr. a letter threatening to kill Earnhardt at Pocono, Watkins Glen, or Dover, prompting the FBI to provide security for Earnhardt on the three tracks. The investigation was closed after the races at the three tracks finished without incident.\n1988\u20131989.\nThe 1988 season saw Earnhardt racing with a new sponsor, GM Goodwrench, after Wrangler Jeans dropped its sponsorship in 1987. During this season, he changed the color of his paint scheme from blue and yellow to the signature black in which the No. 3 car was painted for the rest of his life. He won three races in 1988, finishing third in the points standings behind Bill Elliott in first and Rusty Wallace in second. The following year, Earnhardt won five races, but a late spin out at North Wilkesboro arguably cost him the 1989 championship, as Rusty Wallace edged him out for it. It was his first season for the GM Goodwrench Chevrolet Lumina.\n1990\u20131995.\nThe 1990 season started for Earnhardt with victories in the Busch Clash and his heat of the Gatorade Twin 125's. Near the end of the Daytona 500, he had a dominant forty-second lead when the final caution flag came out with a handful of laps to go. When the green flag waved, Earnhardt was leading Derrike Cope. On the final lap, Earnhardt ran over a piece of metal, which was later revealed as a bell housing, in turn 4, cutting down a tire. Cope, in an upset, won the race while Earnhardt finished fifth after leading 155 of the 200 laps. The No. 3 Goodwrench-sponsored Chevy team took the flat tire that cost them the win and hung it on the shop wall as a reminder of how close they had come to winning the Daytona 500. Earnhardt won nine races that season and won his fourth Winston Cup title, beating Mark Martin by 26 points. He also became the first multiple winner of the annual all-star race, The Winston. The 1991 season saw Earnhardt win his fifth Winston Cup championship. This season, he scored four wins and won the championship by 195 points over Ricky Rudd. One of his wins came at North Wilkesboro, in a race where Harry Gant had a chance to set a single-season record by winning his fifth consecutive race, breaking a record held by Earnhardt. Late in the race, Gant lost his brakes, which gave Earnhardt the chance he needed to make the pass for the win and maintain his record.\nEarnhardt's only win of the 1992 season came at Charlotte, in the Coca-Cola 600, ending a 13-race win streak by Ford teams. Earnhardt finished a career-low 12th in the points for the second time in his career, and the only time he had finished that low since joining Richard Childress Racing. He still made the trip to the annual Awards Banquet with Rusty Wallace but did not have the best seat in the house. Wallace stated he and Earnhardt had to sit on the backs of their chairs to see, and Earnhardt said, \"This sucks, I should have gone hunting.\" At the end of the year, longtime crew chief Kirk Shelmerdine left to become a driver. Andy Petree took over as crew chief. Hiring Petree turned out to be beneficial, as Earnhardt returned to the front in 1993. He once again came close to a win at the Daytona 500 and dominated Speedweeks before finishing second to Dale Jarrett on a last-lap pass. Earnhardt scored six wins en route to his sixth Winston Cup title, including wins in the first prime-time Coca-Cola 600 and The Winston, both at Charlotte, and the Pepsi 400 at Daytona. He beat Rusty Wallace for the championship by 80 points. On November 14, 1993, after the season ending Hooters 500 at Atlanta, the race winner Wallace and 1993 series champion Earnhardt ran a dual Polish Victory Lap together while carrying #28 and #7 flags commemorating 1992 Daytona 500 winner Davey Allison and 1992 NASCAR Winston Cup Series champion Alan Kulwicki respectively, who both had died in separate plane accidents during the season. \nIn 1994, Earnhardt achieved a feat that he himself had believed to be impossible\u2014he scored his seventh Winston Cup championship, tying Richard Petty. He was very consistent, scoring four wins, and after Ernie Irvan was sidelined due to a near-deadly crash at Michigan (the two were neck-and-neck at the top of the points up until the crash), won the title by over 400 points over Mark Martin. Earnhardt sealed the deal at Rockingham by winning the race over Rick Mast. It was his final NASCAR championship and his final season for the GM Goodwrench Chevrolet Lumina. Earnhardt started off the 1995 season by finishing second in the Daytona 500 to Sterling Marlin. He won five races in 1995, including his first road course victory at Sears Point. He also won the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis Motor Speedway, a win he called the biggest of his career. But in the end, Earnhardt lost the championship to Jeff Gordon by 34 points. The GM Goodwrench racing team changed to Chevrolet Monte Carlos.\n1996\u20131999.\n1996 for Earnhardt started just like it had done in 1993\u2014he dominated Speedweeks, only to finish second in the Daytona 500 to Dale Jarrett for the second time. He won early in the year, scoring consecutive victories at Rockingham and Atlanta. On July 28 in the DieHard 500 at Talladega, he was second in points and looking for his eighth season title, despite the departure of crew chief Andy Petree. Late in the race, Ernie Irvan lost control of his No. 28 Havoline-sponsored Ford Thunderbird, made contact with the No. 4 Kodak-sponsored Chevy Monte Carlo of Sterling Marlin, and ignited a crash that saw Earnhardt's No. 3 Chevrolet hit the tri-oval wall nearly head-on at almost 200\u00a0mph. After hitting the wall, Earnhardt's car flipped and slid across the track, in front of race-traffic. His car was hit in the roof and windshield. This accident, as well as a similar accident that led to the death of Russell Phillips at Charlotte, led NASCAR to mandate the \"Earnhardt Bar\", a metal brace located in the center of the windshield that reinforces the roof in case of a similar crash. This bar is also required in NASCAR-owned United SportsCar Racing and its predecessors for road racing.\nRain delays had canceled the live telecast of the race, and most fans first learned of the accident during the night's sports newscasts. Video of the crash showed what appeared to be a fatal incident, but once medical workers arrived at the car, Earnhardt climbed out and waved to the crowd, refusing to be loaded onto a stretcher despite a broken collarbone, sternum, and shoulder blade. Although the incident looked like it would end his season early, Earnhardt refused to stay out of the car. The next week at Indianapolis, he started the race but exited the car on the first pit stop, allowing Mike Skinner to take the wheel. When asked, Earnhardt said that vacating the No. 3 car was the hardest thing he had ever done. The following weekend at Watkins Glen, he drove the No. 3 Goodwrench Chevrolet to the fastest time in qualifying, earning the \"True Grit\" pole. T-shirts emblazoned with Earnhardt's face were quickly printed up, brandishing the caption, \"It Hurt So Good\". Earnhardt led for most of the race and looked to have victory in hand, but fatigue took its toll and he ended up sixth behind race winner Geoff Bodine. Earnhardt did not win again in 1996 but still finished fourth in the standings behind Terry Labonte, Jeff Gordon, and Dale Jarrett. David Smith departed as crew chief of the No. 3 team and RCR at the end of the year for personal reasons, and he was replaced by Larry McReynolds.\nIn 1997, Earnhardt went winless for only the second time in his career. The only (non-points) win came during Speedweeks at Daytona in the Twin 125-mile qualifying race, his record eighth-straight win in the event. Once again in the hunt for the Daytona 500 with 10 laps to go, Earnhardt was taken out of contention by a late crash which sent his car upside down on the backstretch. He hit the low point of his year when he blacked out early in the Mountain Dew Southern 500 at Darlington in September, causing him to hit the wall. Afterward, he was disoriented, and it took several laps before he could find his pit stall. When asked, Earnhardt complained of double vision which made it difficult to pit. Mike Dillon (Richard Childress's son-in-law) was brought in to relieve Earnhardt for the remainder of the race. Earnhardt was evaluated at a local hospital and cleared to race the next week, but the cause of the blackout and double vision was never determined. Despite no wins, the Richard Childress Racing team finished the season fifth in the final standings. \nOn February 15, 1998, Earnhardt finally won the Daytona 500 in his 20th attempt after failing to win in his previous 19 attempts. He began the season by winning his Twin 125-mile qualifier race for the ninth straight year, and the week before was the first to drive around the track under the newly installed lights, for coincidentally 20 laps. On race day, he showed himself to be a contender early. Halfway through the race, however, it seemed that Jeff Gordon had the upper hand. But by lap 138, Earnhardt had taken the lead and thanks to a push by teammate Mike Skinner, he maintained it. Earnhardt made it to the caution-checkered flag before Bobby Labonte. Afterwards, there was a large show of respect for Earnhardt, in which every crew member of every team lined pit road to shake his hand as he made his way to victory lane. Earnhardt then drove his No. 3 into the infield grass, starting a trend of post-race celebrations. He spun the car twice, throwing grass and leaving tire tracks in the shape of a No. 3 in the grass. He then spoke about the victory, saying, \"I have had a lot of great fans and people behind me all through the years and I just can't thank them enough. The Daytona 500 is ours. We won it, we won it, we won it!\" The rest of the season did not go as well, and the Daytona 500 was his only victory that year. Despite that, he did almost pull off a Daytona sweep, where he was one of the contenders for the win in the first nighttime Pepsi 400, but a pit stop late in the race in which a rogue tire cost him the race win. He slipped to 12th in the point standings halfway through the season, and Richard Childress decided to make a crew chief change, taking Mike Skinner's crew chief Kevin Hamlin and putting him with Earnhardt while giving Skinner Larry McReynolds (Earnhardt's crew chief). Earnhardt finished the 1998 season eighth in the final points standings.\nBefore the 1999 season, fans began discussing Earnhardt's age and speculating that with his son, Dale Jr., making his Winston Cup debut, Earnhardt might be contemplating retirement. Earnhardt swept both races for the year at Talladega, leading some to conclude that his talent had become limited to the restrictor plate tracks, which require a unique skill set and an exceptionally powerful racecar to win. But halfway through the year, Earnhardt began to show some of the old spark. In the August race at Michigan, he led laps late in the race and nearly pulled off his first win on a non-restrictor-plate track since 1996. One week later, he provided NASCAR with one of its most controversial moments. At the Bristol night race, Earnhardt found himself in contention to win his first short track race since Martinsville in 1995. When a caution came out with 15 laps to go, leader Terry Labonte got hit from behind by the lapped car of Darrell Waltrip. His spin put Earnhardt in the lead with five cars between him and Labonte with 5 laps to go. Labonte had four fresh tires, and Earnhardt was driving on old tires, which made Earnhardt's car considerably slower. Labonte caught Earnhardt and passed him coming to the white flag, but Earnhardt drove hard into turn two, bumping Labonte and spinning him around. Earnhardt collected the win while spectators booed and made obscene gestures. \"I didn't mean to turn him around, I just wanted to rattle his cage,\" Earnhardt said of the incident. He finished seventh in the standings that year.\n2000.\nIn the 2000 season, Earnhardt had a resurgence, which was commonly attributed to neck surgery he underwent to correct a lingering injury from his 1996 Talladega crash. He scored what were considered the two most exciting wins of the year\u2014winning by 0.010 seconds over Bobby Labonte at Atlanta, then gaining seventeen positions in the final four laps to win at Talladega, claiming his only No Bull million-dollar bonus along with his record 10th win at the track. Earnhardt also had second-place runs at Richmond and Martinsville, tracks where he had struggled through the late 1990s. On the strength of those performances, Earnhardt got to second in the standings. However, poor performances at the road course of Watkins Glen, where he wrecked coming out of the chicane, a wreck with Kenny Irwin Jr. while leading the spring race at Bristol, and mid-pack runs at intermediate tracks like Charlotte and Dover in a season dominated by the Ford Taurus in those tracks from Roush, Yates, and Penske, coupled with Bobby Labonte's extreme consistency, denied Earnhardt an eighth championship title. Earnhardt finished 2000 with 2 wins, 13 top fives, 24 top tens, an average finish of 9.4, and was the only driver besides Labonte to finish the season with zero DNF's.\nDeath.\nDuring the Daytona 500 at Daytona International Speedway on February 18, 2001, Earnhardt was killed in a three-car crash on the final lap of the race. He collided with Ken Schrader after making small contact with Sterling Marlin and hit the outside wall head-on. He had been blocking Schrader on the outside and Marlin on the inside at the time of the crash. Earnhardt's and Schrader's cars both slid off the track's asphalt banking into the infield grass just inside of turn 4. Seconds later, his driver Michael Waltrip won the race, with his teammate and son Dale Earnhardt Jr. finishing second. Earnhardt's death was officially pronounced at the Halifax Medical Center at 5:16 PM Eastern Standard Time (22:16 UTC); he was 49 years old. NASCAR president Mike Helton confirmed Earnhardt's death in a statement to the press. An autopsy conducted on February 19, 2001, concluded that Earnhardt sustained a fatal basilar skull fracture. Days later, on February 22, public funeral services were held at the Calvary Church in Charlotte, North Carolina.\nAftermath.\nAfter Earnhardt's death, two investigations led by the police and NASCAR commenced; nearly every detail of the crash was made public. The allegations of seatbelt failure resulted in Bill Simpson's resignation from the company bearing his name, which manufactured the seatbelts used in Earnhardt's car and nearly every other NASCAR driver's car. NASCAR implemented rigorous safety improvements, such as mandating the HANS device, which Earnhardt refused to wear after finding it restrictive and uncomfortable. Several press conferences were held in the days following Earnhardt's death. After driver Sterling Marlin and his relatives received hate mail and death threats from angry fans, Waltrip and Earnhardt Jr. absolved him of any responsibility. Richard Childress made a public pledge that the number 3 would never again adorn the side of a black race car with a GM Goodwrench sponsorship. Childress, who holds the rights from NASCAR to the No. 3, placed a moratorium on using it; the number returned for the 2014 season, this time not sponsored by GM Goodwrench (which was rebranded GM Certified Service in 2011), driven by Childress's grandson Austin Dillon.\nAt this time, his team was re-christened as the No. 29 team. Childress' second-year Busch Series driver Kevin Harvick was named as Earnhardt's replacement, beginning with the 2001 Dura Lube 400 at North Carolina Speedway. Special pennants bearing the No. 3 were distributed to everyone at the track to honor Earnhardt, and the Childress team wore blank uniforms out of respect, something which disappeared quickly and was soon replaced by the previous GM Goodwrench Service Plus uniforms. Harvick's car always displayed the Earnhardt stylized number 3 on the \"B\" posts (metal portion on each side of the car to the rear of the front windows) above the number 29 until the end of 2013, when he departed for Stewart-Haas Racing.\nFans began honoring Earnhardt by holding three fingers aloft on the third lap of every race, a black screen of No. 3 in the beginning of \"NASCAR Thunder 2002\" before the EA Sports logo, and the television coverage of \"NASCAR on Fox\" and \"NASCAR on NBC\" went silent for each third lap from Rockingham to the following year's race there in honor of Earnhardt, unless on-track incidents brought out the caution flag on the third lap. Three weeks after Earnhardt's death, Harvick, driving a car that had been prepared for Earnhardt, scored his first career Cup win at Atlanta. On the final lap of the 2001 Cracker Barrel Old Country Store 500, he beat Jeff Gordon by .006 seconds (the margin being 0.004 of a second closer than Earnhardt had won over Bobby Labonte at the same race a year ago) in an identical photo finish, and the images of Earnhardt's longtime gas man Danny \"Chocolate\" Myers crying after the victory, Harvick's tire-smoking burnout on the frontstretch with three fingers held aloft outside the driver's window; and the Fox television call by Mike Joy, Larry McReynolds, and Darrell Waltrip concluding with \"Just like a year ago [with Earnhardt and Bobby Labonte], but he [Harvick] is gonna get him though...Gordon got loose... it's Harvick! Harvick by inches!\" are memorable to many NASCAR fans. The win was also considered cathartic for a sport whose epicenter had been ripped away. Harvick would win another race at the inaugural event at Chicagoland en route to a ninth-place finish in the final points, and won Rookie of the Year honors along with the 2001 NASCAR Busch Series Championship.\nDale Earnhardt, Inc. won five races in the 2001 season, beginning with Steve Park's victory in the race at Rockingham just one week after Earnhardt's death. Earnhardt Jr. and Waltrip finished first and second in the series' return to Daytona in July for the Pepsi 400, a reverse of the finish in the Daytona 500. Earnhardt Jr. also won the fall races at Dover (first post 9/11 race) and Talladega and came to an eighth-place points finish.\nEarnhardt's remains were interred at his estate in Mooresville, North Carolina after a private funeral service on February 21, 2001.\nNo. 3 car.\nEarnhardt drove the No. 3 car for the majority of his career, spanning the latter half of the 1981 season, and then again from 1984 until his death in 2001. Although he had other sponsors during his career, his No. 3 is associated in fans' minds with his last sponsor GM Goodwrench and his last color scheme\u00a0\u2014 a predominantly black car with bold red and silver trim. The black and red No. 3 continues to be one of the most famous logos in North American motor racing.\nA common misconception was that Richard Childress Racing \"owned the rights\" to the No. 3 in NASCAR competition (fueled by the fact that Kevin Harvick's car had a little No. 3 as an homage to Earnhardt from 2001-2013 and the usage of the No. 3 on the Camping World Truck Series truck of Ty Dillon when he ran in that series), but in fact NASCAR, and no specific team, owns the rights to this or any other number. According to established NASCAR procedures, Richard Childress Racing had priority over other teams if they chose to reuse the number, which they did when Austin Dillon was promoted to the Cup series in 2014. While Richard Childress Racing owns the stylized No. 3 logos used during Earnhardt's lifetime (and used presently with Dillon), those rights would hypothetically not prevent a future racing team from using a different No. 3 design (also, a new No. 3 team would most likely, in any case, need to create logos which fit with their sponsor's logos).\nIn 2004, ESPN released a made-for-TV movie entitled \"\", which used a new (but similarly colored) No. 3 logo. The movie was a sympathetic portrayal of Earnhardt's life, but the producers were sued for using the No. 3 logo. In December 2006, the ESPN lawsuit was settled, but details were not released to the public.\nDale Earnhardt Jr. made two special appearances in 2002 in a No. 3 Busch Series car: these appearances were at the track where his father died (Daytona) and the track where he made his first Winston Cup start (Charlotte). Earnhardt Jr. won the first of those two races, which was the season-opening event at Daytona. He also raced a No. 3 sponsored by Wrangler on July 2, 2010, for Richard Childress Racing at Daytona. In a green-white-checker finish he outran Joey Logano to win his second race in the No. 3.\nOtherwise, the No. 3 was missing from the national touring series until September 5, 2009, when Austin Dillon, the 19-year-old grandson of Richard Childress, debuted an RCR-owned No. 3 truck in the Camping World Truck Series. Dillon and his younger brother Ty Dillon drove the No. 3 in various lower level competitions for several years, including the Camping World East Series. In 2012, Austin Dillon began driving in the Nationwide Series full-time, using the No. 3; he had previously used the No. 33 while driving in that series part-time.\nRichard Childress Racing entered a No. 3 in the Daytona truck race on February 13, 2010, painted identically to when Earnhardt drove it, but with a sponsorship from Bass Pro Shops. It was driven by Austin Dillon. It was involved in a wreck almost identical to that which took the life of Earnhardt: being spun out, colliding with another vehicle, and being turned into the outside wall in turn number four. He walked away unscathed. Dillon again returned to a No. 3 marked racecar when he started fifth in the 2012 Daytona Nationwide Series opener in an Advocare sponsored black Chevrolet Impala. On December 11, 2013, RCR announced that Austin Dillon would drive the No. 3 car in the upcoming 2014 Sprint Cup season, bringing the number back to the series for the first time in 13 years.\nOnly the former International Race of Champions actually retired the No. 3, which they did in a rule change effective in 2004. Until the series folded in 2007, anyone wishing to use the No. 3 again had to use No. 03 instead.\nFormula One driver Daniel Ricciardo chose the number \"3\" as his permanent racing number when F1's rules changed to allow drivers to choose their own numbers for 2014 and stated on Twitter that part of the reason for his choice was that he was a fan of Earnhardt's, while his helmet design features the number stylized in the same way.\nLegacy.\n\"Earnhardt Tower\", a seating section at Daytona International Speedway was opened and named in his honor a month before his death at the track.\nEarnhardt has several roads named after him, including a street in his hometown Kannapolis. Dale Earnhardt Boulevard (originally Earnhardt Road) is marked as Exit 60 off Interstate 85, northeast of Charlotte. Dale Earnhardt Drive is also the start of The Dale Journey Trail, a self-guided driving tour of landmarks in the lives of Earnhardt and his family. The North Carolina Department of Transportation switched the designation of a road between Kannapolis and Mooresville near the headquarters of DEI (that used to be called NC 136) with NC 3, which was in Currituck County. In addition, Exit 72 off Interstate 35W, one of the entrances to Texas Motor Speedway, is named \"Dale Earnhardt Way\".\nBetween the 2004 and 2005 JGTC (renamed Super GT from 2005) season, Hasemi Sport competed in the series with a sole black G'Zox sponsored Nissan 350Z with the same number and letterset as Earnhardt on the roof.\nDuring the NASCAR weekend races at Talladega Superspeedway on April 29, 2006\u00a0\u2013 May 1, 2006, the DEI cars competed in identical special black paint schemes on Dale Earnhardt Day, which is held annually on his birthday\u2014April 29. Martin Truex Jr., won the Aaron's 312 in the black car, painted to reflect Earnhardt's Intimidating Black No. 3 NASCAR Busch Grand National series car. In the Nextel Cup race on May 1, No. 8 Dale Earnhardt Jr.; No. 1 Martin Truex Jr.; and No. 15 Paul Menard competed in cars with the same type of paint scheme.\nOn June 18, 2006, at Michigan for the 3M Performance 400, Earnhardt Jr. ran a special vintage Budweiser car to honor his father and his grandfather Ralph Earnhardt. He finished third after rain caused the race to be cut short. The car was painted to resemble Ralph's 1956 dirt cars, and carried 1956-era Budweiser logos to complete the throwback look.\nIn the summer of 2007, Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI) with the Dale Earnhardt Foundation, announced it will fund an annual undergraduate scholarship at Clemson University in Clemson, South Carolina for students interested in motorsports and automotive engineering. Scholarship winners are also eligible to work at DEI in internships. The first winner was William Bostic, a senior at Clemson majoring in mechanical engineering.\nIn 2008, on the 50th anniversary of the first Daytona 500 race, DEI and RCR teamed up to make a special COT sporting Earnhardt's 1998 Daytona 500 paint scheme to honor the tenth anniversary of his Daytona 500 victory. In a tribute to all previous Daytona 500 winners, the winning drivers appeared in a lineup on stage, in chronological order. The throwback No. 3 car stood in the infield, in the approximate position Earnhardt would have taken in the processional. The throwback car featured the authentic 1998-era design on a current-era car, a concept similar to modern throwback jerseys in other sports. The car was later sold in 1:64 and 1:24 scale models.\nThe Intimidator 305 roller coaster has been open since April 2, 2010 at Kings Dominion in Doswell, Virginia. Named after Earnhardt, the ride's trains are modeled after his black-and-red Chevrolet.\n Another Intimidator was built at Carowinds, in Charlotte, North Carolina, which opened on March 27, 2010. The entrance to both roller coasters feature signage that shows Earnhardt's legacy along with one of his cars.\nAtlanta Braves assistant coach Ned Yost was a friend of Earnhardt, and Richard Childress. When Yost was named Milwaukee Brewers manager, he changed jersey numbers, from No. 5 to No. 3 in Earnhardt's honor. (No. 3 is retired by the Braves in honor of outfielder Dale Murphy, so Yost could not make the change while in Atlanta.) When Yost was named Kansas City Royals assistant coach, he wore No. 2 for the 2010 season, even when he was named manager in May 2010, but for the 2011 season, he switched back to No. 3.\nDuring the third lap of the 2011 Daytona 500 (a decade since Earnhardt's death), the commentators on FOX fell silent while fans raised three fingers in a similar fashion to the tributes throughout 2001.\nThe north entrance to New Avondale City Center in Arizona will bear the name Dale Earnhardt Drive. Avondale is where Earnhardt won a Cup race in 1990.\nHis helmet from the 1998 season is at the National Museum of American History in the Smithsonian museum in Washington D.C.\nWeedeater, a sludge metal band from North Carolina, paid tribute to Earnhardt on their 2003 album \"Sixteen Tons\", with the song \"No. 3\". The song is played with audio clips from television broadcasts about Earnhardt mixed in the background. He is also mentioned in a 2001 song composed by John Hiatt entitled \"The Tiki Bar Is Open,\" along with his legendary race number. \nOn February 28, 2016, after winning the Folds of Honor QuikTrip 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway, during his victory lap, driver Jimmie Johnson held his hand out of his window, with three fingers extended in tribute to Earnhardt. This was following Johnson's 76th Cup Series win, which tied the career mark of Earnhardt's. This is also the track where Earnhardt claimed his sixth Winston Cup Series title."}
{"id": "7896", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7896", "title": "List of games based on Dune", "text": "A number of games have been published based on the \"Dune\" universe created by Frank Herbert.\nVideo games.\nTo date, there have been five licensed \"Dune\"-related video games released. There have also been many \"Dune\"-based MUDs (Multi-User Dimension) and browser-based online games, all created and run by fans.\n\"Dune\" (1992).\n1992's \"Dune\" from Cryo Interactive/Virgin Interactive blends adventure with strategy. Loosely following the story of the 1965 novel \"Dune\" and using many visual elements from the 1984 film of the same name by David Lynch, the game casts the player as Paul Atreides, with the ultimate goal of driving the Harkonnens from the planet Dune and taking control of its valuable export, the spice. Key to success is the management of spice mining, military forces, and ecology as the player amasses allies and skills. One aspect of the game allows the player to terraform Arrakis from a desert into a fertile and green planet, at the cost of sandworm habitat and reduced melange spice production.\n\"Dune II\" (1992).\n\"Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty\", later retitled \"Dune II: Battle for Arrakis\" for the Mega Drive/Genesis port, was released in December 1992 from Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive. Often considered to be the first \"mainstream modern real-time strategy game\", \"Dune II\" established many conventions of the genre. Only loosely connected to the plot of the novels or films, the game pits three interplanetary houses \u2014 the Atreides, the Harkonnens, and the Ordos \u2014 against each other for control of the planet Arrakis and its valuable spice, all while fending off the destructive natural forces of the harsh desert planet itself.\n\"Dune 2000\" (1998).\n\"Dune 2000\", a 1998 remake of \"Dune II\" from Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive, added improved graphics and live-action cutscenes. Though gameplay is similar to its predecessor, \"Dune 2000\" features an enhanced storyline and functionality.\n\"Emperor: Battle for Dune\" (2001).\n\"Emperor: Battle for Dune\" (Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Electronic Arts) was released on June 12, 2001. A sequel to \"Dune 2000\", the real-time strategy game features 3D graphics and live-action cutscenes, and casts players as Atreides, Harkonnens, or Ordos.\n\"Frank Herbert's Dune\" (2001).\nReleased in 2001 by Cryo Interactive/DreamCatcher Interactive, \"Frank Herbert's Dune\" is a 3D video game based on the 2000 Sci Fi Channel miniseries of the same name. As Paul Muad'Dib Atreides, the player must become leader of the Fremen, seize control of Dune, and defeat the evil Baron Harkonnen. The game was not a commercial or critical success, and Cryo subsequently filed for bankruptcy in July 2002.\n\"Dune Generations\" (2001, cancelled).\nIn 2001, Cryonetworks disclosed information about \"Dune Generations\", an online, 3D real-time strategy game set in the \"Dune\" universe. An official website for the upcoming game featured concept images, a brief background story and description of the persistent gameworld, and a list of frequently asked questions. The game would be constructed using Cryo's own online multimedia development framework SCOL.\nWithin \"the infrastructure of a permanent and massive multiplayer world that exists online,\" \"Dune Generations\" would let players assume control of a dynasty in the \"Dune\" universe, with the goal of first mastering the natural resources of their own homeworlds and ultimately rising in power and influence through conflicts and alliances with other player dynasties. Each of the three available dynasty types \u2014 traders, soldiers, or mercenaries \u2014 would provide a different playing experience, all with the long-term goal of gaining control of Arrakis and its valuable spice.\nA preview video trailer was released in November 2001. The game was still in the alpha testing stage in February 2002, and the project was ultimately halted after Cryo filed for bankruptcy in July 2002.\n\"Dune Wars\" mod for \"Civilization IV\".\nThe \"Dune Wars\" mod is a total conversion of \"\" to the \"Dune\" setting. The mod was featured by Tom Chick in the relaunched Tom vs Bruce series. In 2015 an updated version of the mod called \"Dune Wars: Revival\" was released.\nOnline games.\nDuneMUSH.\n\"Dune II\" was an unlicensed, online multiplayer MUSH active in the early 1990s."}
{"id": "7897", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7897", "title": "Dune/Videogames", "text": ""}
{"id": "7898", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7898", "title": "Dune computer and video games", "text": ""}
{"id": "7900", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7900", "title": "List of Dune characters", "text": "\"Dune\" is a science fiction media franchise that originated with the 1965 novel \"Dune\" by American author Frank Herbert. \"Dune\" is frequently cited as the best-selling science fiction novel in history, and won the 1966 Hugo Award as well as the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel. Herbert wrote five sequels before his death in 1986. \"Dune\" was adapted into a 1984 film, and a 2000 television miniseries. The first two sequels were presented as a miniseries in 2003.\nSince 1999, Herbert's son Brian Herbert and science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson have published eleven prequel novels, as well as two which complete the original \"Dune\" series.\nFrank Herbert works.\nFrank Herbert's \"Dune\" was published in 1965, and he wrote five sequels before his death in 1986: \"Dune Messiah\" (1969), \"Children of Dune\" (1976), \"God Emperor of Dune\" (1981), \"Heretics of Dune\" (1984), and \"\" (1985). \"Dune\" follows Paul, the scion of House Atreides, as his family is thrown into the dangerous political intrigues centered on the desert planet Arrakis, only known source of the oracular spice melange, the most important and valuable substance in the universe. The series spans 5,000 years, focusing on Paul's various descendants.\nBrian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson works.\nSince 1999, Herbert's son Brian Herbert and author Kevin J. Anderson have published eleven prequel novels, collected in the series \"Prelude to Dune\" (1999\u20132001), \"Legends of Dune\" (2002\u20132004), \"Heroes of Dune\" (2008\u20132009), and \"Great Schools of Dune\" (2012\u20132016). They have also released two novels\u2014\"Hunters of Dune\" (2006) and \"Sandworms of Dune\" (2007)\u2014which complete the original series.\nTitans and Neo-Cymeks.\nTitans:\nNeo-Cymeks:"}
{"id": "7901", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7901", "title": "Vladimir Harkonnen", "text": "The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen ( or ) is a fictional character from the \"Dune\" franchise created by Frank Herbert. He is primarily featured in the 1965 novel \"Dune\" and is also a prominent character in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy (1999\u20132001) by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson. The character is brought back as a ghola in the Herbert/Anderson sequels which conclude the original series, \"Hunters of Dune\" (2006) and \"Sandworms of Dune\" (2007).\nBaron Harkonnen is portrayed by Kenneth McMillan in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\". Ian McNeice plays the role in the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries \"Frank Herbert's Dune\" and its sequel, 2003's \"Children of Dune\". Harkonnen will be portrayed by Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\".\nConception.\nFrank Herbert wanted a harsh-sounding name for the antagonistic family opposing House Atreides in \"Dune\". He came across the name \"H\u00e4rk\u00f6nen\" in a California telephone book and thought that it sounded \"Soviet\", though it is in fact Finnish. In earlier drafts of \"Dune\", the character was called \"Valdemar Hoskanner\".\nDescription.\nHerbert's \"Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses)\" in \"Dune\" says of Harkonnen (in part):\nThe character is usually described as the primary antagonist of the novel. Herbert writes in \"Dune\" that the Baron possesses a \"basso voice\" and is so \"grossly and immensely fat\" that he requires anti-gravity devices known as suspensors to support his weight. He is one of the wealthiest members of the Landsraad and a bitter rival of Leto Atreides, and the Baron's \"legendary evil and intellect\" are unmatched by anyone else from House Harkonnen. In the novel, the Baron feigns outrage over losing control of Arrakis to Leto, but is actually conspiring to use the situation as an opportunity to destroy the Atreides once and for all. William Hughes of \"The A.V. Club\" describes the Baron as \"a decadent, monstrous gasbag of depravity and evil\". As ruthless and cruel as he is intelligent and cunning, the Baron is \"crafty and power-hungry\" and has a talent for manipulating others and exploiting their weaknesses, as well as a propensity for torture and blackmail. \"IGN\" describes the character as \"cruel, sadistic and hedonistic\", Travis Johnson of Flicks.com.au explains that Harkonnen is written as \"a predatory homosexual given to pederasty and incest, an unrepentant rapist and murderer.\" The Baron's sexual preference for young men is implied in \"Dune\" and \"Children of Dune\". It is noted, however, that he \"once permitted himself to be seduced\" by a Bene Gesserit in the liaison which produced his secret daughter.\nPlotlines.\n\"Dune\".\nAs \"Dune\" begins, a longstanding feud exists between the Harkonnens of Giedi Prime and the Atreides of Caladan. The Baron's intent to exterminate the Atreides line seems close to fruition as Duke Leto Atreides is lured to the desert planet Arrakis on the pretense of taking over the valuable melange operation there. The Baron has an agent in the Atreides household: Leto's own physician, the trusted Suk doctor Wellington Yueh. Though Suk Imperial Conditioning supposedly makes the subject incapable of inflicting harm, the Baron's twisted Mentat Piter De Vries notes:\nThe Baron has taken Yueh's wife Wanna prisoner, threatening her with interminable torture unless Yueh complies with his demands. Harkonnen also distracts Leto's Mentat Thufir Hawat from discovering Yueh by guiding Hawat toward another suspect: Leto's Bene Gesserit concubine Lady Jessica, of whom Hawat is already distrustful. The Atreides are soon attacked by Harkonnen forces (secretly supplemented by the seemingly unstoppable Imperial Sardaukar) as Yueh disables the protective shields around the Atreides palace on Arrakis. As instructed, Yueh takes Leto prisoner; however, desiring to slay the Baron, Yueh provides the captive Leto with a fake tooth filled with poisonous gas as a means of simultaneous assassination and suicide. De Vries kills Yueh but he also dies with Leto in the assassination attempt; however Harkonnen survives. The Baron then manipulates Hawat into his service, by convincing Hawat that Lady Jessica was the traitor and using Hawat's desire for revenge on Lady Jessica and the Emperor as motivation to assist House Harkonnen.\nJessica flees into the desert with her and Leto's son Paul Atreides, and both are presumed dead. Paul's prescience helps him determine the identity of Jessica's father, the \"maternal grandfather who cannot be named\" \u2014 the Baron himself. Over the next two years, Harkonnen learns that his nephews Glossu Rabban and Feyd-Rautha are conspiring against him to usurp his throne; he lets them continue to do so, reasoning that they have to somehow learn to organize a conspiracy. As punishment for a failed assassination attempt against him, Harkonnen forces Feyd to single-handedly slaughter all the female slaves who serve as Feyd's lovers. He explains that Feyd has to learn the price of failure.\nThe Baron's plan to assure Feyd's power is to install him as ruler of Arrakis after a period of tyrannical misrule by Rabban, making Feyd appear to be the savior of the people. However, a crisis on Arrakis begins when the mysterious Muad'Dib emerges as a leader of the native Fremen tribes, uniting them against the rule of the Harkonnens. Eventually, a series of Fremen victories against Beast Rabban threaten to disrupt the trade of the spice, inciting the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to intervene personally, leading several legions of Sardaukar. After the emperor's arrival on Arrakis, both Corrino and Harkonnen are shocked to learn that rather than a native Fremen warlord, their opponent Muad'Dib is the still-living Paul Atreides, and the Emperor's intervention was part of his plan. The Imperial forces fall prey to a surprise attack by the Fremen, who let a sandstorm short out the force field shields of the transport ships, disable them with projectile weapons, and then mount a mass assult using sandworms as siege-breakers. Their enemies are left trapped on the planet, outnumbered by the many tribes and outgunned by the sandworms. The Harkonnen's past ruthlessness further causes the enraged Fremen to give them little to no quarter; over the course of the battle their entire army is exterminated.\nThe Harkonnen leadership are also all killed in the course of this battle. Rabban dies first, in the early stages of the battle. Baron Harkonnen himself is poisoned with a gom jabbar by Paul's sister Alia Atreides, still a toddler physically but an adult Reverend Mother mentally, who reveals that she is his granddaughter to him just before his death. His remaining heir Feyd-Rautha is killed in ritual combat by Paul Atreides. House Harkonnen as a political entity is left virtually defunct, permanently excluded from galactic power, though Harkonnen \"blood\" is technically ascendant, as Imperial House Atreides is composed entirely of Vladimir Harkonnen's descendants.\n\"Children of Dune\".\nAlia had been born with her ancestral memories in the womb, a circumstance the Bene Gesserit refer to as Abomination, because in their experience it is inevitable that the individual will become possessed by the personality of one of their ancestors. In \"Children of Dune\", Alia falls victim to this prediction when she shares control of her body with the ego-memory of the Baron Harkonnen, and eventually falls under his power. Alia eventually commits suicide, realizing that Harkonnen's consciousness has surpassed her abilities to contain him.\n\"Prelude to Dune\".\nIn the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel series by Brian Herbert and Anderson, it is established that Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is the son and heir of Dmitri Harkonnen and his wife Victoria. Harkonnen's father had been the head of House Harkonnen and ruled the planet Giedi Prime. Trained since youth as a possible successor, Vladimir had been eventually chosen over his half-brother Abulurd (namesake of the original). Unhappy with his brother's doings, Abulurd eventually marries Emmi Rabban and renounces the family name and his rights to the title. Under the name Abulurd Rabban, he reigns as governor of the secondary Harkonnen planet Lankiveil. Abulurd and his wife have two sons: Glossu Rabban (later nicknamed \"Beast Rabban\" after he murders his own father) and Feyd-Rautha; Vladimir later adopts the boys back into House Harkonnen, and Feyd becomes his designated heir. The Baron's most prominent political rival is Duke Leto Atreides; the Harkonnens and the Atreides have been bitter enemies for millennia, since the Battle of Corrin that ended the Butlerian Jihad. When Emperor Shaddam IV orchestrates a plot to destroy the \"Red Duke\" Leto, the Baron eagerly lends his aid.\nThe young Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is described as an exceedingly handsome man, possessing red hair and a near-perfect physique. The Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam is instructed by the Sisterhood to collect his genetic material (through conception) for their breeding program. As the Baron's homosexuality is something of an open secret, Mohiam blackmails him into having sexual relations with her and conceives his child. When that daughter proves genetically undesirable, Mohiam kills her and returns to Harkonnen for a second try; at this point he drugs and viciously rapes her. She exacts her retribution by infecting him with a rare, incurable disease that later causes his obesity. Mohiam's second child with the Baron is Jessica.&gt; In ', the deteriorating Baron at first walks with the assistance of a cane, then relies on belt-mounted suspensors to retain mobility. He consults numerous doctors in the expanse of time between the ' and \"Dune: House Harkonnen\", up to and including his future instrument Dr. Yueh, all of whom are ultimately no help. To conceal this debilitation, he pretends that his obesity is due to intentional overindulgence, lest the Landsraad remove him from power. When he determines that Mohiam inflicted him with the disease, he attempts to coerce her into revealing the cure, but soon discovers that there is none. The Baron, Duke Leto, and Jessica herself are unaware that Jessica is secretly the Baron's daughter or that he has even fathered one. In the year 10,176, the Baron's grandson Paul is born to Leto and Jessica.\n\"Hunters of Dune\".\nIn \"Hunters of Dune\" (2006), the continuation of the original series by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson, the Baron is resurrected as a ghola (5,029 years after the death of Alia) by the Lost Tleilaxu Uxtal, acting on orders from the Face Dancer Khrone. Khrone intends to use the Baron ghola to manipulate a ghola of Paul Atreides, named Paolo. Khrone tries various torture techniques for three years to awaken the 12-year-old Baron's genetic memories; these methods fail due to the Baron's sadomasochistic nature. Khrone is successful when he imprisons the Baron in a sensory deprivation tank for a prolonged period; the Baron's memories of his former life return. The reincarnated Baron is soon haunted by the voice of Alia in his mind; the source of this inner Alia is never explained.\nIn adaptations.\n1984 film.\nBaron Harkonnen is portrayed by Kenneth McMillan in David Lynch's 1984 film. The obese and disheveled Baron is overtly unstable, and covered in oozing pustules. William Hughes of \"The A.V. Club\" deemed McMillan's facial prosthetics \"very memorable\". Emmet Asher-Perrin of \"Tor.com\" wrote that \"Lynch's attempt is infamous for really leaning on [the] codified aspects of the Baron, to the point where his sore-ridden appearance has been called out as a likely connection to the AIDS epidemic, which was a prevalent health crisis while the film was in production.\" Travis Johnson of Flicks.com.au noted that the Lynch film embraced \"the archetype of the depraved gay sadist\", which would not be acceptable in 2019. Asher-Perrin added, \"Lynch also makes a point of connecting the Baron's desire for men to deviancy and violence, deliberately juxtaposing his assault of a young man with a tender love scene between Duke Leto and Lady Jessica Atreides.\"\n2000 miniseries.\nIan McNeice plays the Baron in the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries \"Frank Herbert's Dune\", and its sequel, 2003's \"Children of Dune\". Asher-Perrin notes that the miniseries played down the negative aspects emphasized by the Lynch film, and writes, \"[The Baron's] appearance was not altered to make him seem ill, he never physically attacks anyone, and the miniseries paid more attention to the fact that the Baron was a rapist, his preference for men being incidental.\" She also praises McNeice as a standout among the cast, writing that he \"manages to make the Baron Harkonnen\u2014easily one of the most despicable characters in science fiction literature\u2014every bit as conniving and vicious as he needs to be...and every bit as fascinating. McNeice has a superb sense of how to make the baron mesmerizing to watch no matter how odiously he behaves\".\n2021 film.\nBaron Harkonnen will be portrayed by Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\". Skarsg\u00e5rd called the role \"small but important\", and noted \"I had seven hours in make-up every day because I had to be really fat.\" Villeneuve said:\nDiscussing the film in its early stages, Asher-Perrin writes that \"Baron Harkonnen needn't be obese for the sole purpose of making misguided points.\" She suggests that the film find \"a different way to highlight the Baron's obsession with excess\", and argues that the character's iconic suspensors could be presented as \"an affectation of laziness rather than a physical necessity.\" Travis Johnson adds that the novel's depiction of Harkonnen as \"a predatory homosexual\" is problematic in 2019. He writes of the new film, \"It's going to come down to the writing and filmmaking as to whether this characterization will fly in the current era, or will come across as an unfortunate throwback stereotype.\"\nMerchandising and influence.\nA line of \"Dune\" action figures from toy company LJN was released to lackluster sales in 1984. Styled after David Lynch's film, the collection featured a figure of Baron Harkonnen, as well as other characters. In 2006, SOTA Toys produced a Baron Harkonnen action figure for their \"Now Playing Presents\" line.\nH. R. Giger's Harkonnen Capo Chair is a chair originally designed by the artist as set dressing for an unrealized 1970s adaptation of \"Dune\" by Alejandro Jodorowsky.\nAnalysis.\nWilliam Hughes calls the Baron \"one of the most iconically awful villains in all of science fiction\", and Stuart Conover of ScienceFiction.com describes him as \"one of the most insidious villains\". Maude Campbell of \"Popular Mechanics\" writes that the Baron is \"one of the most evil characters ever put to paper (including Darth Vader)\", and Jon Michaud of \"The New Yorker\" compares \n\"Herbert's scheming, backstabbing villain, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen\" to the villainous Lannister family of George R. R. Martin's \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series. Emmet Asher-Perrin suggests that \"what makes the Baron truly monstrous [is] the fact that he spends all of his time plotting murder, sowing discord, and destroying populations of people to get his way\". Hughes writes that the evil Harkonnen is \"specifically designed to make the noble Atreides family seem that extra bit more dignified and pure\", with Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" agreeing that the Baron is \"as cruel and vindictive as Leto is noble and just.\" Hughes goes on to say that Herbert \"successfully made [the Baron] so vampirically vile that he casts a (sometimes literal) shadow over the entire series.\" Sandy Schaefer of \"Screen Rant\" calls the Baron \" a deliciously despicable antagonist\". Travis Johnson points out that in the novel Harkonnen is a predatory homosexual given to pederasty and incest, an unrepentant rapist and murderer, but depicting him as a \"depraved gay sadist\" is \"not a particularly good look in the cold light of 2019.\" Asher-Perrin also notes:\nWhile the novel suggests that the Baron's obesity might be the result of a genetic disease, the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson explains that Harkonnen was once a fit, attractive but vain man who is given the incurable disease intentionally by the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Mohiam after he drugs and rapes her. Asher-Perrin suggests that in this narrative, \"the Baron's corpulence is meant to be comeuppance for doing something reprehensible, a physical punishment meant to hurt his vanity by taking away the attractiveness he so prized in himself.\" He also remarks that this retelling \"does nothing to alleviate the connection being drawn between weight and hedonistic sadism\"."}
{"id": "7902", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7902", "title": "Piter De Vries", "text": "Piter De Vries is a fictional character from the \"Dune\" universe created by Frank Herbert. He is primarily featured in the 1965 novel \"Dune\", but also appears in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy (1999\u20132001) by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson.\nDe Vries is portrayed by Brad Dourif in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\", and by Jan Unger in the 2000 \"Dune\" miniseries. The character will be played by David Dastmalchian in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\".\nCharacter.\nIn the service of the ruthless Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, De Vries is a Mentat\u2014a human specially trained to perform mental functions rivaling computers, which are forbidden universe-wide. In addition, De Vries has been \"twisted\" into an amoral sadist by the Tleilaxu.\nDe Vries is so loyal to Harkonnen that he continues to serve the Baron with great enthusiasm even though his Mentat abilities and great intelligence confirm his suspicions that his master plans to eventually kill him. As he says in \"Dune\":\nDe Vries is described in the novel \"Dune\" (though not portrayed on screen) as being addicted to the drug melange, which colors both the sclera and irises of users a deep blue. He also has the ruby red lips characteristic of sapho drinkers.\nAppearances.\n\"Dune\".\nIn \"Dune\", it is established that De Vries had pioneered a type of toxin called \"residual poison\" which remains in the body for years and requires an antidote to be administered regularly. One such fatal poison is secretly administered by the Harkonnens to Thufir Hawat, the Mentat of House Atreides, in order to guarantee Hawat's allegiance to the Harkonnens, who alone possess the antidote. De Vries is the architect of the plan to destroy House Atreides, longtime enemy of the Harkonnens, while restoring the Baron's stewardship over the planet Arrakis. Dr. Wellington Yueh, personal physician to House Atreides, has undergone Suk conditioning, which renders him incapable of inflicting harm on his patients. De Vries breaks this conditioning through torture and psychological manipulation, and Yueh eventually betrays House Atreides. De Vries originally plans to claim Lady Jessica, the concubine of Duke Leto Atreides, as his slave, but he decides to become governor of Arrakis instead. However, Yueh has given the captured Leto a false tooth filled with poison gas. When Leto crushes the tooth, the intended victim Baron Harkonnen escapes, but Leto and De Vries die.\n\"Prelude to Dune\".\nIn \"\" (published in 2001 and the third novel in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel series by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson), Piter De Vries discovers the Harkonnen heritage of Lady Jessica and her newborn son Paul, and attempts to kidnap and ransom the infant. The plot is thwarted and the secret preserved\u2014the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam kills the Mentat and arranges for his corpse to be shipped home to Giedi Prime. An enraged Baron is left with no choice but to order a duplicate from the Bene Tleilax: the Mentat De Vries featured in Herbert's original novel \"Dune\".\nIn adaptations.\nDe Vries is portrayed by Brad Dourif in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\", and by Jan Unger in the 2000 \"Dune\" miniseries. The character will be played by David Dastmalchian in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\"."}
{"id": "7903", "revid": "19234916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7903", "title": "Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange", "text": "Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange is a method of securely exchanging cryptographic keys over a public channel and was one of the first public-key protocols as conceived by Ralph Merkle and named after Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman. DH is one of the earliest practical examples of public key exchange implemented within the field of cryptography. Published in 1976 by Diffie and Hellman, this is the earliest publicly known work that proposed the idea of a private key and a corresponding public key.\nTraditionally, secure encrypted communication between two parties required that they first exchange keys by some secure physical means, such as paper key lists transported by a trusted courier. The Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange method allows two parties that have no prior knowledge of each other to jointly establish a shared secret key over an insecure channel. This key can then be used to encrypt subsequent communications using a symmetric key cipher.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman is used to secure a variety of Internet services. However, research published in October 2015 suggests that the parameters in use for many DH Internet applications at that time are not strong enough to prevent compromise by very well-funded attackers, such as the security services of some countries.\nThe scheme was published by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman in 1976, but in 1997 it was revealed that James H. Ellis, Clifford Cocks, and Malcolm J. Williamson of GCHQ, the British signals intelligence agency, had previously shown in 1969 how public-key cryptography could be achieved.\nAlthough Diffie\u2013Hellman key agreement itself is a non-authenticated key-agreement protocol, it provides the basis for a variety of authenticated protocols, and is used to provide forward secrecy in Transport Layer Security's ephemeral modes (referred to as EDH or DHE depending on the cipher suite).\nThe method was followed shortly afterwards by RSA, an implementation of public-key cryptography using asymmetric algorithms.\nExpired from 1977 describes the now public-domain algorithm. It credits Hellman, Diffie, and Merkle as inventors.\nName.\nIn 2002, Hellman suggested the algorithm be called Diffie\u2013Hellman\u2013Merkle key exchange in recognition of Ralph Merkle's contribution to the invention of public key cryptography (Hellman, 2002), writing:\nDescription.\nGeneral overview.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman key exchange establishes a shared secret between two parties that can be used for secret communication for exchanging data over a public network. An analogy illustrates the concept of public key exchange by using colors instead of very large numbers:\nThe process begins by having the two parties, Alice and Bob, publicly agree on an arbitrary starting color that does not need to be kept secret (but should be different every time). In this example, the color is yellow. Each person also selects a secret color that they keep to themselves \u2013 in this case, red and blue-green. The crucial part of the process is that Alice and Bob each mix their own secret color together with their mutually shared color, resulting in orange-tan and light-blue mixtures respectively, and then publicly exchange the two mixed colors. Finally, each of them mixes the color they received from the partner with their own private color. The result is a final color mixture (yellow-brown in this case) that is identical to the partner's final color mixture.\nIf a third party listened to the exchange, it would only know the common color (yellow) and the first mixed colors (orange-tan and light-blue), but it would be difficult for this party to determine the final secret color (yellow-brown). Bringing the analogy back to a real-life exchange using large numbers rather than colors, this determination is computationally expensive. It is impossible to compute in a practical amount of time even for modern supercomputers.\nCryptographic explanation.\nThe simplest and the original implementation of the protocol uses the multiplicative group of integers modulo \"p\", where \"p\" is prime, and \"g\" is a primitive root modulo \"p\". These two values are chosen in this way to ensure that the resulting shared secret can take on any value from 1 to \"p\"\u20131. Here is an example of the protocol, with non-secret values in blue, and secret values in red.\nBoth Alice and Bob have arrived at the same values because under mod p,\nMore specifically,\nOnly \"a\" and \"b\" are kept secret. All the other values \u2013 \"p\", \"g\", \"ga\" mod \"p\", and \"gb\" mod \"p\" \u2013 are sent in the clear. The strength of the scheme comes from the fact that \"gab\" mod \"p\" = \"gba\" mod \"p\" take extremely long times to compute by any known algorithm just from the knowledge of \"p\", \"g\", \"ga\" mod \"p\", and \"gb\" mod \"p\". Once Alice and Bob compute the shared secret they can use it as an encryption key, known only to them, for sending messages across the same open communications channel.\nOf course, much larger values of \"a\", \"b\", and \"p\" would be needed to make this example secure, since there are only 23 possible results of \"n\" mod 23. However, if \"p\" is a prime of at least 600 digits, then even the fastest modern computers using the fastest known algorithm cannot find \"a\" given only \"g\", \"p\" and \"ga\" mod \"p\". Such a problem is called the discrete logarithm problem. The computation of \"ga\" mod \"p\" is known as modular exponentiation and can be done efficiently even for large numbers.\nNote that \"g\" need not be large at all, and in practice is usually a small integer (like 2, 3, ...).\nSecrecy chart.\nThe chart below depicts who knows what, again with non-secret values in blue, and secret values in red. Here Eve is an eavesdropper \u2013 she watches what is sent between Alice and Bob, but she does not alter the contents of their communications.\nNow s is the shared secret key and it is known to both Alice and Bob, but \"not\" to Eve. Note that it is not helpful for Eve to compute \"AB\", which equals \"g\"a + b mod p.\nNote: It should be difficult for Alice to solve for Bob's private key or for Bob to solve for Alice's private key. If it is not difficult for Alice to solve for Bob's private key (or vice versa), Eve may simply substitute her own private / public key pair, plug Bob's public key into her private key, produce a fake shared secret key, and solve for Bob's private key (and use that to solve for the shared secret key. Eve may attempt to choose a public / private key pair that will make it easy for her to solve for Bob's private key).\nAnother demonstration of Diffie\u2013Hellman (also using numbers too small for practical use) is given here.\nGeneralization to finite cyclic groups.\nHere is a more general description of the protocol:\nBoth Alice and Bob are now in possession of the group element \"gab\", which can serve as the shared secret key. The group \"G\" satisfies the requisite condition for secure communication if there is not an efficient algorithm for determining \"gab\" given \"g\", \"ga\", and \"gb\".\nFor example, the elliptic curve Diffie\u2013Hellman protocol is a variant that uses elliptic curves instead of the multiplicative group of integers modulo p.\u00a0Variants using hyperelliptic curves have also been proposed. The supersingular isogeny key exchange is a Diffie\u2013Hellman variant that has been designed to be secure against quantum computers.\nOperation with more than two parties.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman key agreement is not limited to negotiating a key shared by only two participants. Any number of users can take part in an agreement by performing iterations of the agreement protocol and exchanging intermediate data (which does not itself need to be kept secret). For example, Alice, Bob, and Carol could participate in a Diffie\u2013Hellman agreement as follows, with all operations taken to be modulo \"p\":\nAn eavesdropper has been able to see ', ', ', ', ', and ', but cannot use any combination of these to efficiently reproduce \".\nTo extend this mechanism to larger groups, two basic principles must be followed:\nThese principles leave open various options for choosing in which order participants contribute to keys. The simplest and most obvious solution is to arrange the \"N\" participants in a circle and have \"N\" keys rotate around the circle, until eventually every key has been contributed to by all \"N\" participants (ending with its owner) and each participant has contributed to \"N\" keys (ending with their own). However, this requires that every participant perform \"N\" modular exponentiations.\nBy choosing a more optimal order, and relying on the fact that keys can be duplicated, it is possible to reduce the number of modular exponentiations performed by each participant to using a divide-and-conquer-style approach, given here for eight participants:\nOnce this operation has been completed all participants will possess the secret \", but each participant will have performed only four modular exponentiations, rather than the eight implied by a simple circular arrangement.\nSecurity.\nThe protocol is considered secure against eavesdroppers if \"G\" and \"g\" are chosen properly. In particular, the order of the group G must be large, particularly if the same group is used for large amounts of traffic. The eavesdropper has to solve the Diffie\u2013Hellman problem to obtain \"g\"\"ab\". This is currently considered difficult for groups whose order is large enough. An efficient algorithm to solve the discrete logarithm problem would make it easy to compute \"a\" or \"b\" and solve the Diffie\u2013Hellman problem, making this and many other public key cryptosystems insecure. Fields of small characteristic may be less secure.\nThe order of \"G\" should have a large prime factor to prevent use of the Pohlig\u2013Hellman algorithm to obtain \"a\" or \"b\". For this reason, a Sophie Germain prime \"q\" is sometimes used to calculate , called a safe prime, since the order of \"G\" is then only divisible by 2 and \"q\". \"g\" is then sometimes chosen to generate the order \"q\" subgroup of \"G\", rather than \"G\", so that the Legendre symbol of \"ga\" never reveals the low order bit of \"a\". A protocol using such a choice is for example IKEv2.\n\"g\" is often a small integer such as 2. Because of the random self-reducibility of the discrete logarithm problem a small \"g\" is equally secure as any other generator of the same group.\nIf Alice and Bob use random number generators whose outputs are not completely random and can be predicted to some extent, then it is much easier to eavesdrop.\nIn the original description, the Diffie\u2013Hellman exchange by itself does not provide authentication of the communicating parties and is thus vulnerable to a man-in-the-middle attack. Mallory (an active attacker executing the man-in-the-middle attack) may establish two distinct key exchanges, one with Alice and the other with Bob, effectively masquerading as Alice to Bob, and vice versa, allowing her to decrypt, then re-encrypt, the messages passed between them. Note that Mallory must continue to be in the middle, actively decrypting and re-encrypting messages every time Alice and Bob communicate. If she is ever absent, her previous presence is then revealed to Alice and Bob. They will know that all of their private conversations had been intercepted and decoded by someone in the channel. In most cases it will not help them get Mallory's private key, even if she used the same key for both exchanges.\nA method to authenticate the communicating parties to each other is generally needed to prevent this type of attack. Variants of Diffie\u2013Hellman, such as STS protocol, may be used instead to avoid these types of attacks.\nPractical attacks on Internet traffic.\nThe number field sieve algorithm, which is generally the most effective in solving the discrete logarithm problem, consists of four computational steps. The first three steps only depend on the order of the group G, not on the specific number whose finite log is desired. It turns out that much Internet traffic uses one of a handful of groups that are of order 1024\u00a0bits or less. By precomputing the first three steps of the number field sieve for the most common groups, an attacker need only carry out the last step, which is much less computationally expensive than the first three steps, to obtain a specific logarithm. The Logjam attack used this vulnerability to compromise a variety of Internet services that allowed the use of groups whose order was a 512-bit prime number, so called export grade. The authors needed several thousand CPU cores for a week to precompute data for a single 512-bit prime. Once that was done, individual logarithms could be solved in about a minute using two 18-core Intel Xeon CPUs.\nAs estimated by the authors behind the Logjam attack, the much more difficult precomputation needed to solve the discrete log problem for a 1024-bit prime would cost on the order of $100 million, well within the budget of a large national intelligence agency such as the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA). The Logjam authors speculate that precomputation against widely reused 1024-bit DH primes is behind claims in leaked NSA documents that NSA is able to break much of current cryptography.\nTo avoid these vulnerabilities, the Logjam authors recommend use of elliptic curve cryptography, for which no similar attack is known. Failing that, they recommend that the order, \"p\", of the Diffie\u2013Hellman group should be at least 2048\u00a0bits. They estimate that the pre-computation required for a 2048-bit prime is 109 times more difficult than for 1024-bit primes.\nOther uses.\nEncryption.\nPublic key encryption schemes based on the Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange have been proposed. The first such scheme is the ElGamal encryption. A more modern variant is the Integrated Encryption Scheme.\nForward secrecy.\nProtocols that achieve forward secrecy generate new key pairs for each session and discard them at the end of the session. The Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange is a frequent choice for such protocols, because of its fast key generation.\nPassword-authenticated key agreement.\nWhen Alice and Bob share a password, they may use a password-authenticated key agreement (PK) form of Diffie\u2013Hellman to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks. One simple scheme is to compare the hash of s concatenated with the password calculated independently on both ends of channel. A feature of these schemes is that an attacker can only test one specific password on each iteration with the other party, and so the system provides good security with relatively weak passwords. This approach is described in ITU-T Recommendation X.1035, which is used by the G.hn home networking standard.\nAn example of such a protocol is the Secure Remote Password protocol.\nPublic key.\nIt is also possible to use Diffie\u2013Hellman as part of a public key infrastructure, allowing Bob to encrypt a message so that only Alice will be able to decrypt it, with no prior communication between them other than Bob having trusted knowledge of Alice's public key. Alice's public key is formula_3. To send her a message, Bob chooses a random \"b\" and then sends Alice formula_4 (unencrypted) together with the message encrypted with symmetric key formula_5. Only Alice can determine the symmetric key and hence decrypt the message because only she has \"a\" (the private key). A pre-shared public key also prevents man-in-the-middle attacks.\nIn practice, Diffie\u2013Hellman is not used in this way, with RSA being the dominant public key algorithm. This is largely for historical and commercial reasons, namely that RSA Security created a certificate authority for key signing that became Verisign. Diffie\u2013Hellman, as elaborated above, cannot directly be used to sign certificates. However, the ElGamal and DSA signature algorithms are mathematically related to it, as well as MQV, STS and the IKE component of the IPsec protocol suite for securing Internet Protocol communications."}
{"id": "7904", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7904", "title": "Designing Experiments", "text": ""}
{"id": "7905", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7905", "title": "Discrete probability distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "7906", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7906", "title": "Destry Rides Again", "text": "Destry Rides Again is a 1939 American Western film directed by George Marshall and starring Marlene Dietrich and James Stewart.\nThe supporting cast includes Mischa Auer, Charles Winninger, Brian Donlevy, Allen Jenkins, Irene Hervey, Billy Gilbert, Bill Cody Jr., Lillian Yarbo, and Una Merkel. Although the title comes from Max Brand's popular novel, which inspired the earlier screenplay with Tom Mix, this version is almost entirely unrelated to either.\nIn 1996, \"Destry Rides Again\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nSaloon owner Kent, the unscrupulous boss of the fictional Western town of Bottleneck, has the town's sheriff, Mr. Keogh, killed when Keogh asks one too many questions about a rigged poker game. Kent and Frenchy, a cheap saloon tramp who is his girlfriend, now have a stranglehold over the local cattle ranchers. The town's crooked mayor, Hiram J. Slade, who is in collusion with Kent, appoints the town drunk, Washington Dimsdale, as the new sheriff, assuming that he will be easy to control and manipulate. However, Dimsdale, a deputy under the famous lawman Tom Destry, promptly swears off drinking, and is able to call upon the latter's equally formidable son, Tom Destry Jr., to help him make Bottleneck a lawful, respectable town.\nDestry arrives in Bottleneck with Jack Tyndall, a cattleman, and his sister, Janice. Destry initially confounds the townsfolk by refusing to strap on a gun and maintaining civility in dealing with everyone, including Kent and Frenchy. This quickly makes him a disappointment to Dimsdale and a laughingstock to the townspeople; he is mockingly asked to \"clean up\" Bottleneck by being given a mop and bucket. However, after a number of rowdy horsemen ride into town shooting their pistols in the air, he demonstrates uncanny expertise in marksmanship and threatens to jail them if they do it again, earning the respect of Bottleneck's citizens.\nThrough the townsmen's evasive answers regarding the whereabouts of Keogh, Destry gradually begins to suspect that Keogh was murdered. He confirms this by provoking Frenchy into admitting it, but without a location for the body, he lacks any proof. Destry therefore deputizes Boris, a Russian immigrant whom Frenchy had earlier humiliated, and implies to Kent that he had found the body outside of town \"in remarkably good condition\". When Kent sends a member of his gang to check on Keogh's burial site, Boris and Dimsdale follow, capture, and jail him.\nAlthough the gang member is charged with Keogh's murder (in the hope that he would implicate Kent in exchange for clemency), Mayor Slade appoints himself judge of the trial, making an innocent verdict a foregone conclusion. To prevent this, Destry calls in a judge from a larger city in secret, but the plan is ruined after Boris accidentally gives away the other judge's name in the saloon. Kent orders Frenchy to invite the deputy to her house while other gang members storm the sheriff's office and cause a breakout; now in love with Destry, she accepts. When shots are fired, he rushes back, to find the cell empty and Dimsdale mortally wounded. Destry returns to his room and puts on his gun belt, abandoning his previous commitment to nonviolence.\nUnder Destry's command, the honest townsmen form a posse and prepare to attack the saloon, where Kent's gang is fortified, while Destry enters through the roof and looks for Kent. At Frenchy's urging, the townswomen march in between the groups, preventing further violence, before breaking into the saloon and subduing the gang. Kent narrowly escapes, and attempts to shoot Destry from the second floor; Frenchy takes the bullet for him, killing her, and Destry kills Kent.\nSome time later, Destry is shown to be the sheriff of a now lawful Bottleneck, repeating to children the stories that Dimsdale told him of the town's violent history. He jokingly tells a story about marriage to Janice, implying a marriage between them will soon follow.\nCast.\nAs appearing in screen credits:\nSongs.\nDietrich sings \"See What the Boys in the Back Room Will Have\" and \"You've Got That Look\", written by Frank Loesser, set to music by Frederick Hollander, which have become classics.\nProduction.\nFamed Western writer Max Brand contributed the novel, \"Destry Rides Again\", but the film also owes its origins to Brand's serial \"Twelve Peers\", published in a pulp magazine. In the original work, Harrison (or \"Harry\") Destry was not a pacifist. As filmed in 1932, with Tom Mix in the starring role, the central character differed in that Destry did wear six-guns in that version.\nThe film was James Stewart's first western (he would not return to the genre until 1950, with \"Winchester '73\", followed by \"Broken Arrow\"). The story featured a ferocious cat-fight between Marlene Dietrich and Una Merkel, which apparently caused a mild censorship problem at the time of release.\nThe film also represented Dietrich's return to Hollywood after a string of flops at Paramount (\"Angel\", \"The Scarlet Empress\", \"The Devil is a Woman\") caused her, and a number of other stars, to be labeled \"box office poison.\" While vacationing at Cap d'Antibes with her family, her mentor Josef von Sternberg and her lover Erich Maria Remarque, she received an offer from Joe Pasternak to come to Universal at half the salary she had been receiving for most of the 1930s. Pasternak had previously tried to sign Dietrich to Universal while she was still in Berlin.\nUnsure of what to do she was advised by von Sternberg \"I made you into a Goddess. Now show them you have feet of clay.\"\nAccording to writer/director Peter Bogdanovich, Marlene Dietrich told him during an aircraft flight that she and James Stewart had an affair during shooting and that she became pregnant but had a surreptitious abortion without telling Stewart.\nInternationally, the film was released under the alternative titles \"\" in French and \"Arizona\" in Spanish.\nReception.\n\"Destry Rides Again\" was generally well accepted by the public, as well as critics. It was reviewed by Frank S. Nugent in \"The New York Times\", who noted that the film did not follow the usual Hollywood type-casting. On Dietrich's role, he characterized, \"It's difficult to reconcile Miss Dietrich's Frenchy, the cabaret girl of the Bloody Gulch Saloon, with the posed and posturing Dietrich we last saw in Mr. Lubitsch's 'Angel'.\" Stewart's contribution was similarly treated, \"turning in an easy, likable, pleasantly humored performance.\"\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "7918", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7918", "title": "DegreeConfluenceProject", "text": ""}
{"id": "7920", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7920", "title": "DravidianLanguages", "text": ""}
{"id": "7921", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7921", "title": "Derivative", "text": "In mathematics, the derivative of a function of a real variable measures the sensitivity to change of the function value (output value) with respect to a change in its argument (input value). Derivatives are a fundamental tool of calculus. For example, the derivative of the position of a moving object with respect to time is the object's velocity: this measures how quickly the position of the object changes when time advances.\nThe derivative of a function of a single variable at a chosen input value, when it exists, is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at that point. The tangent line is the best linear approximation of the function near that input value. For this reason, the derivative is often described as the \"instantaneous rate of change\", the ratio of the instantaneous change in the dependent variable to that of the independent variable.\nDerivatives can be generalized to functions of several real variables. In this generalization, the derivative is reinterpreted as a linear transformation whose graph is (after an appropriate translation) the best linear approximation to the graph of the original function. The Jacobian matrix is the matrix that represents this linear transformation with respect to the basis given by the choice of independent and dependent variables. It can be calculated in terms of the partial derivatives with respect to the independent variables. For a real-valued function of several variables, the Jacobian matrix reduces to the gradient vector.\nThe process of finding a derivative is called differentiation. The reverse process is called \"antidifferentiation\". The fundamental theorem of calculus relates antidifferentiation with integration. Differentiation and integration constitute the two fundamental operations in single-variable calculus.\nDifferentiation.\n\"Differentiation\" is the action of computing a derivative. The derivative of a function of a variable is a measure of the rate at which the value of the function changes with respect to the change of the variable . It is called the \"derivative\" of with respect to . If and are real numbers, and if the graph of is plotted against , the derivative is the slope of this graph at each point.\nThe simplest case, apart from the trivial case of a constant function, is when is a linear function of , meaning that the graph of is a line. In this case, , for real numbers and , and the slope is given by\nwhere the symbol (Delta) is an abbreviation for \"change in\", and the combinations formula_2 and formula_3 refer to corresponding changes, i.e.\nThe above formula holds because\nThus\nThis gives the value for the slope of a line.\nIf the function is not linear (i.e. its graph is not a straight line), then the change in divided by the change in varies over the considered range: differentiation is a method to find a unique value for this rate of change, not across a certain range formula_7 but at any given value of .\nThe idea, illustrated by Figures 1 to 3, is to compute the rate of change as the limit value of the ratio of the differences as tends towards 0.\nNotation.\nTwo distinct notations are commonly used for the derivative, one deriving from Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and the other from Joseph Louis Lagrange. A third notation, first used by Isaac Newton, is sometimes seen in physics.\nIn Leibniz's notation, an infinitesimal change in is denoted by , and the derivative of with respect to is written\nsuggesting the ratio of two infinitesimal quantities. (The above expression is read as \"the derivative of \"y\" with respect to \"x\", \"dy\" by \"dx\", or \"dy\" over \"dx\". The oral form \"dy\" \"dx\" is often used conversationally, although it may lead to confusion.)\nIn Lagrange's notation, the derivative with respect to of a function is denoted (read as \"f\" prime of \"x\") or (read as \"f\" prime \"x\" of \"x\"\"), in case of ambiguity of the variable implied by the differentiation. Lagrange's notation is sometimes incorrectly attributed to Newton.\nNewton's notation for differentiation (also called the dot notation for differentiation) places a dot over the dependent variable. That is, if \"y\" is a function of \"t\", then the derivative of \"y\" with respect to \"t\" is\nHigher derivatives are represented using multiple dots, as in\nNewton's notation is generally used when the independent variable denotes time. If location is a function of \"t\", then formula_9 denotes velocity and formula_12 denotes acceleration.\nRigorous definition.\nThe most common approach to turn this intuitive idea into a precise definition is to define the derivative as a limit of difference quotients of real numbers. This is the approach described below.\nLet be a real valued function defined in an open neighborhood of a real number . In classical geometry, the tangent line to the graph of the function at was the unique line through the point that did \"not\" meet the graph of transversally, meaning that the line did not pass straight through the graph. The derivative of with respect to at is, geometrically, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of at . The slope of the tangent line is very close to the slope of the line through and a nearby point on the graph, for example . These lines are called secant lines. A value of close to zero gives a good approximation to the slope of the tangent line, and smaller values (in absolute value) of will, in general, give better approximations. The slope of the secant line is the difference between the values of these points divided by the difference between the values, that is, \nThis expression is Newton's difference quotient. Passing from an approximation to an exact answer is done using a limit. Geometrically, the limit of the secant lines is the tangent line. Therefore, the limit of the difference quotient as approaches zero, if it exists, should represent the slope of the tangent line to . This limit is defined to be the derivative of the function at :\nWhen the limit exists, is said to be \"differentiable\" at . Here is one of several common notations for the derivative (see below). From this definition it is obvious that a differentiable function is increasing if and only if its derivative is positive, and is decreasing iff its derivative is negative. This fact is used extensively when analyzing function behavior, e.g. when finding local extrema.\nEquivalently, the derivative satisfies the property that\nwhich has the intuitive interpretation (see Figure 1) that the tangent line to at gives the \"best linear approximation\"\nto near (i.e., for small ). This interpretation is the easiest to generalize to other settings (see below).\nSubstituting 0 for in the difference quotient causes division by zero, so the slope of the tangent line cannot be found directly using this method. Instead, define to be the difference quotient as a function of :\n is the slope of the secant line between and . If is a continuous function, meaning that its graph is an unbroken curve with no gaps, then is a continuous function away from . If the limit exists, meaning that there is a way of choosing a value for that makes a continuous function, then the function is differentiable at , and its derivative at equals .\nIn practice, the existence of a continuous extension of the difference quotient to is shown by modifying the numerator to cancel in the denominator. Such manipulations can make the limit value of for small clear even though is still not defined at . This process can be long and tedious for complicated functions, and many shortcuts are commonly used to simplify the process.\nDefinition over the hyperreals.\nRelative to a hyperreal extension of the real numbers, the derivative of a real function at a real point can be defined as the shadow of the quotient for infinitesimal , where . Here the natural extension of to the hyperreals is still denoted . Here the derivative is said to exist if the shadow is independent of the infinitesimal chosen.\nExample.\nThe square function given by is differentiable at , and its derivative there is 6. This result is established by calculating the limit as approaches zero of the difference quotient of :\nThe last expression shows that the difference quotient equals when and is undefined when , because of the definition of the difference quotient. However, the definition of the limit says the difference quotient does not need to be defined when . The limit is the result of letting go to zero, meaning it is the value that tends to as becomes very small:\nHence the slope of the graph of the square function at the point is , and so its derivative at is .\nMore generally, a similar computation shows that the derivative of the square function at is :\nContinuity and differentiability.\nIf is differentiable at , then must also be continuous at . As an example, choose a point and let be the step function that returns the value 1 for all less than , and returns a different value 10 for all greater than or equal to . cannot have a derivative at . If is negative, then is on the low part of the step, so the secant line from to is very steep, and as tends to zero the slope tends to infinity. If is positive, then is on the high part of the step, so the secant line from to has slope zero. Consequently, the secant lines do not approach any single slope, so the limit of the difference quotient does not exist.\nHowever, even if a function is continuous at a point, it may not be differentiable there. For example, the absolute value function given by is continuous at , but it is not differentiable there. If is positive, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to is one, whereas if is negative, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to is negative one. This can be seen graphically as a \"kink\" or a \"cusp\" in the graph at . Even a function with a smooth graph is not differentiable at a point where its tangent is vertical: For instance, the function given by is not differentiable at .\nIn summary, a function that has a derivative is continuous, but there are continuous functions that do not have a derivative.\nMost functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point. Early in the history of calculus, many mathematicians assumed that a continuous function was differentiable at most points. Under mild conditions, for example if the function is a monotone function or a Lipschitz function, this is true. However, in 1872 Weierstrass found the first example of a function that is continuous everywhere but differentiable nowhere. This example is now known as the Weierstrass function. In 1931, Stefan Banach proved that the set of functions that have a derivative at some point is a meager set in the space of all continuous functions. Informally, this means that hardly any random continuous functions have a derivative at even one point.\nThe derivative as a function.\nLet be a function that has a derivative at every point in its domain. We can then define a function that maps every point to the value of the derivative of at . This function is written and is called the \"derivative function\" or the \"derivative of\" .\nSometimes has a derivative at most, but not all, points of its domain. The function whose value at equals whenever is defined and elsewhere is undefined is also called the derivative of . It is still a function, but its domain is strictly smaller than the domain of .\nUsing this idea, differentiation becomes a function of functions: The derivative is an operator whose domain is the set of all functions that have derivatives at every point of their domain and whose range is a set of functions. If we denote this operator by , then is the function . Since is a function, it can be evaluated at a point . By the definition of the derivative function, .\nFor comparison, consider the doubling function given by ; is a real-valued function of a real number, meaning that it takes numbers as inputs and has numbers as outputs:\nThe operator , however, is not defined on individual numbers. It is only defined on functions:\nBecause the output of is a function, the output of can be evaluated at a point. For instance, when is applied to the square function, , outputs the doubling function , which we named . This output function can then be evaluated to get , , and so on.\nHigher derivatives.\nLet be a differentiable function, and let be its derivative. The derivative of (if it has one) is written and is called the \"second derivative of \". Similarly, the derivative of the second derivative, if it exists, is written and is called the \"third derivative of \". Continuing this process, one can define, if it exists, the th derivative as the derivative of the th derivative. These repeated derivatives are called \"higher-order derivatives\". The th derivative is also called the derivative of order .\nIf represents the position of an object at time , then the higher-order derivatives of have specific interpretations in physics. The first derivative of is the object's velocity. The second derivative of is the acceleration. The third derivative of is the jerk. And finally, the fourth through sixth derivatives of are snap, crackle, and pop; most applicable to astrophysics.\nA function need not have a derivative (for example, if it is not continuous). Similarly, even if does have a derivative, it may not have a second derivative. For example, let\nCalculation shows that is a differentiable function whose derivative at formula_24 is given by\n is twice the absolute value function at formula_24, and it does not have a derivative at zero. Similar examples show that a function can have a th derivative for each non-negative integer but not a th derivative. A function that has successive derivatives is called \" times differentiable\". If in addition the th derivative is continuous, then the function is said to be of differentiability class . (This is a stronger condition than having derivatives, as shown by the second example of .) A function that has infinitely many derivatives is called \"infinitely differentiable\" or \"smooth\".\nOn the real line, every polynomial function is infinitely differentiable. By standard differentiation rules, if a polynomial of degree is differentiated times, then it becomes a constant function. All of its subsequent derivatives are identically zero. In particular, they exist, so polynomials are smooth functions.\nThe derivatives of a function at a point provide polynomial approximations to that function near . For example, if is twice differentiable, then\nin the sense that\nIf is infinitely differentiable, then this is the beginning of the Taylor series for evaluated at around .\nInflection point.\nA point where the second derivative of a function changes sign is called an \"inflection point\". At an inflection point, the second derivative may be zero, as in the case of the inflection point of the function given by formula_29, or it may fail to exist, as in the case of the inflection point of the function given by formula_30. At an inflection point, a function switches from being a convex function to being a concave function or vice versa.\nNotation (details).\nLeibniz's notation.\nThe symbols formula_31, formula_32, and formula_33 were introduced by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1675. It is still commonly used when the equation is viewed as a functional relationship between dependent and independent variables. Then the first derivative is denoted by\nand was once thought of as an infinitesimal quotient. Higher derivatives are expressed using the notation\nfor the \"n\"th derivative of formula_36. These are abbreviations for multiple applications of the derivative operator. For example,\nWith Leibniz's notation, we can write the derivative of formula_38 at the point formula_39 in two different ways:\nLeibniz's notation allows one to specify the variable for differentiation (in the denominator), which is relevant in partial differentiation. It also can be used to write the chain rule as\nLagrange's notation.\nSometimes referred to as \"prime notation\", one of the most common modern notation for differentiation is due to Joseph-Louis Lagrange and uses the prime mark, so that the derivative of a function formula_42 is denoted formula_43. Similarly, the second and third derivatives are denoted\nTo denote the number of derivatives beyond this point, some authors use Roman numerals in superscript, whereas others place the number in parentheses:\nThe latter notation generalizes to yield the notation formula_48 for the \"n\"th derivative of formula_42 \u2013 this notation is most useful when we wish to talk about the derivative as being a function itself, as in this case the Leibniz notation can become cumbersome.\nNewton's notation.\nNewton's notation for differentiation, also called the dot notation, places a dot over the function name to represent a time derivative. If formula_50, then\ndenote, respectively, the first and second derivatives of formula_38. This notation is used exclusively for derivatives with respect to time or arc length. It is typically used in differential equations in physics and differential geometry. The dot notation, however, becomes unmanageable for high-order derivatives (order 4 or more) and cannot deal with multiple independent variables.\nEuler's notation.\nEuler's notation uses a differential operator formula_54, which is applied to a function formula_42 to give the first derivative formula_56. The \"n\"th derivative is denoted formula_57.\nIf is a dependent variable, then often the subscript \"x\" is attached to the \"D\" to clarify the independent variable \"x\".\nEuler's notation is then written\nalthough this subscript is often omitted when the variable \"x\" is understood, for instance when this is the only independent variable present in the expression.\nEuler's notation is useful for stating and solving linear differential equations.\nRules of computation.\nThe derivative of a function can, in principle, be computed from the definition by considering the difference quotient, and computing its limit. In practice, once the derivatives of a few simple functions are known, the derivatives of other functions are more easily computed using \"rules\" for obtaining derivatives of more complicated functions from simpler ones.\nRules for basic functions.\nHere are the rules for the derivatives of the most common basic functions, where \"a\" is a real number. \nRules for combined functions.\nHere are some of the most basic rules for deducing the derivative of a compound function from derivatives of basic functions. \nComputation example.\nThe derivative of the function given by\nis\nHere the second term was computed using the chain rule and third using the product rule. The known derivatives of the elementary functions \"x\"2, \"x\"4, sin(\"x\"), ln(\"x\") and , as well as the constant 7, were also used.\nIn higher dimensions.\nVector-valued functions.\nA vector-valued function y of a real variable sends real numbers to vectors in some vector space R\"n\". A vector-valued function can be split up into its coordinate functions , meaning that . This includes, for example, parametric curves in R2 or R3. The coordinate functions are real valued functions, so the above definition of derivative applies to them. The derivative of y(\"t\") is defined to be the vector, called the tangent vector, whose coordinates are the derivatives of the coordinate functions. That is,\nEquivalently,\nif the limit exists. The subtraction in the numerator is the subtraction of vectors, not scalars. If the derivative of y exists for every value of \"t\", then y\u2032 is another vector-valued function.\nIf is the standard basis for R\"n\", then y(\"t\") can also be written as . If we assume that the derivative of a vector-valued function retains the linearity property, then the derivative of y(\"t\") must be\nbecause each of the basis vectors is a constant.\nThis generalization is useful, for example, if y(\"t\") is the position vector of a particle at time \"t\"; then the derivative y\u2032(\"t\") is the velocity vector of the particle at time \"t\".\nPartial derivatives.\nSuppose that \"f\" is a function that depends on more than one variable\u2014for instance,\n\"f\" can be reinterpreted as a family of functions of one variable indexed by the other variables:\nIn other words, every value of \"x\" chooses a function, denoted \"fx\", which is a function of one real number. That is,\nOnce a value of \"x\" is chosen, say \"a\", then determines a function \"fa\" that sends \"y\" to :\nIn this expression, \"a\" is a \"constant\", not a \"variable\", so \"fa\" is a function of only one real variable. Consequently, the definition of the derivative for a function of one variable applies:\nThe above procedure can be performed for any choice of \"a\". Assembling the derivatives together into a function gives a function that describes the variation of \"f\" in the \"y\" direction:\nThis is the partial derivative of \"f\" with respect to \"y\". Here \u2202 is a rounded \"d\" called the partial derivative symbol. To distinguish it from the letter \"d\", \u2202 is sometimes pronounced \"der\", \"del\", or \"partial\" instead of \"dee\".\nIn general, the partial derivative of a function in the direction \"xi\" at the point (\"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"n\") is defined to be:\nIn the above difference quotient, all the variables except \"xi\" are held fixed. That choice of fixed values determines a function of one variable\nand, by definition,\nIn other words, the different choices of \"a\" index a family of one-variable functions just as in the example above. This expression also shows that the computation of partial derivatives reduces to the computation of one-variable derivatives.\nThis is fundamental for the study of the functions of several real variables. Let be such a real-valued function. If all partial derivatives of are defined at the point , these partial derivatives define the vector\nwhich is called the gradient of at . If is differentiable at every point in some domain, then the gradient is a vector-valued function that maps the point to the vector . Consequently, the gradient determines a vector field.\nDirectional derivatives.\nIf \"f\" is a real-valued function on Rn, then the partial derivatives of \"f\" measure its variation in the direction of the coordinate axes. For example, if \"f\" is a function of \"x\" and \"y\", then its partial derivatives measure the variation in \"f\" in the \"x\" direction and the \"y\" direction. They do not, however, directly measure the variation of \"f\" in any other direction, such as along the diagonal line . These are measured using directional derivatives. Choose a vector\nThe directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction of v at the point x is the limit\nIn some cases it may be easier to compute or estimate the directional derivative after changing the length of the vector. Often this is done to turn the problem into the computation of a directional derivative in the direction of a unit vector. To see how this works, suppose that . Substitute into the difference quotient. The difference quotient becomes:\nThis is \"\u03bb\" times the difference quotient for the directional derivative of \"f\" with respect to u. Furthermore, taking the limit as \"h\" tends to zero is the same as taking the limit as \"k\" tends to zero because \"h\" and \"k\" are multiples of each other. Therefore, . Because of this rescaling property, directional derivatives are frequently considered only for unit vectors.\nIf all the partial derivatives of \"f\" exist and are continuous at x, then they determine the directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction v by the formula:\nThis is a consequence of the definition of the total derivative. It follows that the directional derivative is linear in v, meaning that .\nThe same definition also works when \"f\" is a function with values in R\"m\". The above definition is applied to each component of the vectors. In this case, the directional derivative is a vector in R\"m\".\nTotal derivative, total differential and Jacobian matrix.\nWhen \"f\" is a function from an open subset of R\"n\" to R\"m\", then the directional derivative of \"f\" in a chosen direction is the best linear approximation to \"f\" at that point and in that direction. But when , no single directional derivative can give a complete picture of the behavior of \"f\". The total derivative gives a complete picture by considering all directions at once. That is, for any vector v starting at a, the linear approximation formula holds:\nJust like the single-variable derivative, is chosen so that the error in this approximation is as small as possible.\nIf \"n\" and \"m\" are both one, then the derivative is a number and the expression is the product of two numbers. But in higher dimensions, it is impossible for to be a number. If it were a number, then would be a vector in R\"n\" while the other terms would be vectors in R\"m\", and therefore the formula would not make sense. For the linear approximation formula to make sense, must be a function that sends vectors in R\"n\" to vectors in R\"m\", and must denote this function evaluated at v.\nTo determine what kind of function it is, notice that the linear approximation formula can be rewritten as\nNotice that if we choose another vector w, then this approximate equation determines another approximate equation by substituting w for v. It determines a third approximate equation by substituting both w for v and for a. By subtracting these two new equations, we get\nIf we assume that v is small and that the derivative varies continuously in a, then is approximately equal to , and therefore the right-hand side is approximately zero. The left-hand side can be rewritten in a different way using the linear approximation formula with substituted for v. The linear approximation formula implies:\nThis suggests that is a linear transformation from the vector space R\"n\" to the vector space R\"m\". In fact, it is possible to make this a precise derivation by measuring the error in the approximations. Assume that the error in these linear approximation formula is bounded by a constant times ||v||, where the constant is independent of v but depends continuously on a. Then, after adding an appropriate error term, all of the above approximate equalities can be rephrased as inequalities. In particular, is a linear transformation up to a small error term. In the limit as v and w tend to zero, it must therefore be a linear transformation. Since we define the total derivative by taking a limit as v goes to zero, must be a linear transformation.\nIn one variable, the fact that the derivative is the best linear approximation is expressed by the fact that it is the limit of difference quotients. However, the usual difference quotient does not make sense in higher dimensions because it is not usually possible to divide vectors. In particular, the numerator and denominator of the difference quotient are not even in the same vector space: The numerator lies in the codomain R\"m\" while the denominator lies in the domain R\"n\". Furthermore, the derivative is a linear transformation, a different type of object from both the numerator and denominator. To make precise the idea that is the best linear approximation, it is necessary to adapt a different formula for the one-variable derivative in which these problems disappear. If , then the usual definition of the derivative may be manipulated to show that the derivative of \"f\" at \"a\" is the unique number such that\nThis is equivalent to\nbecause the limit of a function tends to zero if and only if the limit of the absolute value of the function tends to zero. This last formula can be adapted to the many-variable situation by replacing the absolute values with norms.\nThe definition of the total derivative of \"f\" at a, therefore, is that it is the unique linear transformation such that\nHere h is a vector in R\"n\", so the norm in the denominator is the standard length on R\"n\". However, \"f\"\u2032(a)h is a vector in R\"m\", and the norm in the numerator is the standard length on R\"m\". If \"v\" is a vector starting at \"a\", then is called the pushforward of v by \"f\" and is sometimes written .\nIf the total derivative exists at a, then all the partial derivatives and directional derivatives of \"f\" exist at a, and for all v, is the directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction v. If we write \"f\" using coordinate functions, so that , then the total derivative can be expressed using the partial derivatives as a matrix. This matrix is called the Jacobian matrix of \"f\" at a:\nThe existence of the total derivative \"f\"\u2032(a) is strictly stronger than the existence of all the partial derivatives, but if the partial derivatives exist and are continuous, then the total derivative exists, is given by the Jacobian, and depends continuously on a.\nThe definition of the total derivative subsumes the definition of the derivative in one variable. That is, if \"f\" is a real-valued function of a real variable, then the total derivative exists if and only if the usual derivative exists. The Jacobian matrix reduces to a 1\u00d71 matrix whose only entry is the derivative \"f\"\u2032(\"x\"). This 1\u00d71 matrix satisfies the property that is approximately zero, in other words that\nUp to changing variables, this is the statement that the function formula_111 is the best linear approximation to \"f\" at \"a\".\nThe total derivative of a function does not give another function in the same way as the one-variable case. This is because the total derivative of a multivariable function has to record much more information than the derivative of a single-variable function. Instead, the total derivative gives a function from the tangent bundle of the source to the tangent bundle of the target.\nThe natural analog of second, third, and higher-order total derivatives is not a linear transformation, is not a function on the tangent bundle, and is not built by repeatedly taking the total derivative. The analog of a higher-order derivative, called a jet, cannot be a linear transformation because higher-order derivatives reflect subtle geometric information, such as concavity, which cannot be described in terms of linear data such as vectors. It cannot be a function on the tangent bundle because the tangent bundle only has room for the base space and the directional derivatives. Because jets capture higher-order information, they take as arguments additional coordinates representing higher-order changes in direction. The space determined by these additional coordinates is called the jet bundle. The relation between the total derivative and the partial derivatives of a function is paralleled in the relation between the \"k\"th order jet of a function and its partial derivatives of order less than or equal to \"k\".\nBy repeatedly taking the total derivative, one obtains higher versions of the Fr\u00e9chet derivative, specialized to R\"p\". The \"k\"th order total derivative may be interpreted as a map\nwhich takes a point x in R\"n\" and assigns to it an element of the space of \"k\"-linear maps from R\"n\" to R\"m\" \u2013 the \"best\" (in a certain precise sense) \"k\"-linear approximation to \"f\" at that point. By precomposing it with the diagonal map \u0394, , a generalized Taylor series may be begun as\nwhere f(a) is identified with a constant function, are the components of the vector , and and are the components of and as linear transformations.\nGeneralizations.\nThe concept of a derivative can be extended to many other settings. The common thread is that the derivative of a function at a point serves as a linear approximation of the function at that point.\nHistory.\nCalculus, known in its early history as \"infinitesimal calculus\", is a mathematical discipline focused on limits, functions, derivatives, integrals, and infinite series. Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz independently discovered calculus in the mid-17th century. However, each inventor claimed the other stole his work in a bitter dispute that continued until the end of their lives."}
{"id": "7922", "revid": "39325414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7922", "title": "Dravidian languages", "text": "The Dravidian languages are a language family spoken by 220 million people, mainly in southern India and northern Sri Lanka, with pockets elsewhere in South Asia. Since the colonial era, there have been small but significant immigrant communities outside South Asia in Mauritius, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Britain, Australia, France, Canada, Germany and the United States.\nThe Dravidian languages are first attested in the 2nd century BCE as Tamil-Brahmi script inscribed on the cave walls in the Madurai and Tirunelveli districts of Tamil Nadu. The Dravidian languages with the most speakers are (in descending order of number of speakers) Telugu, Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam, all of which have long literary traditions. Smaller literary languages are Tulu and Kodava. There are also a number of Dravidian-speaking scheduled tribes, such as the Kurukh in Eastern India and Gondi in Central India.\nOnly two Dravidian languages are spoken exclusively outside the post-1947 state of India: Brahui in the Balochistan region of Pakistan and Afghanistan; and Dhangar, a dialect of Kurukh, in parts of Nepal and Bhutan.Dravidian place names along the Arabian Sea coasts and Dravidian grammatical influence such as clusivity in the Indo-Aryan languages, namely, Marathi, Konkani, Gujarati, Marwari, and Sindhi, suggest that Dravidian languages were once spoken more widely across the Indian subcontinent.\nThough some scholars have argued that the Dravidian languages may have been brought to India by migrations from the Iranian plateau in the fourth or third millennium BCE or even earlier, the Dravidian languages cannot easily be connected to any other language family and could well be indigenous to India.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the Sanskrit word ' is the word '. Kamil Zvelebil cites the forms such as \"dramila\" (in 's Sanskrit work \"Avantisundar\u012bkath\u0101\") ' (found in the Sri Lankan (Ceylonese) chronicle \"Mahavamsa\") and then goes on to say, \"The forms \"dami\u1e37a\"/\"damila\" almost certainly provide a connection of ' \" with the indigenous name of the Tamil language, the likely derivation being \"*' &gt; *' &gt; '- / \"damila\"- and further, with the intrusive, 'hypercorrect' (or perhaps analogical) -\"r\"-, into '. The -\"m\"-/-\"v\"- alternation is a common enough phenomenon in Dravidian phonology\".\nFurthermore, another Dravidianist and linguist, Bhadriraju Krishnamurti, in his book \"Dravidian Languages\" states: \nBased on what Krishnamurti states (referring to a scholarly paper published in the \"International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics\"), the Sanskrit word ' itself is later than ' since the dates for the forms with -r- are centuries later than the dates for the forms without -r- (', '-, \"damela\"- etc.).\nDiscovery.\nThe 14th century Sanskrit text \"Lilatilakam\", which is a grammar of Manipravalam, states that the spoken languages of present-day Kerala and Tamil Nadu were similar, terming them as \"Drami\u1e0da\". The author doesn't consider the \"Kar\u1e47\u1e47\u0101\u1e6da\" (Kannada) and the \"Andhra\" (Telugu) languages as \"Drami\u1e0da\", because they were very different from the language of the \"Tamil Veda\" (\"Tiruvaymoli\"), but states that some people would include them in the \"Drami\u1e0da\" category.\nIn 1816, Alexander D. Campbell suggested the existence of a Dravidian language family in his \"Grammar of the Teloogoo Language\", in which he and Francis W. Ellis argued that Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Tulu and Kodava descended from a common, non-Indo-European ancestor. In 1856 Robert Caldwell published his \"Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian or South-Indian Family of Languages\", which considerably expanded the Dravidian umbrella and established Dravidian as one of the major language groups of the world. Caldwell coined the term \"Dravidian\" for this family of languages, based on the usage of the Sanskrit word \u0926\u094d\u0930\u0935\u093f\u0926\u093e (Dravid\u0101) in the work \"Tantrav\u0101rttika\" by . In his own words, Caldwell says,\n The 1961 publication of the \"Dravidian Etymological Dictionary\" by T. Burrow and M. B. Emeneau proved a notable event in the study of Dravidian linguistics.\nClassification.\nThe Dravidian languages form a close-knit family. Most scholars agree on four groups: South (or South DravidianI), South-Central (or South DravidianII), Central, and North Dravidian, but there are different proposals regarding the relationship between these groups. Earlier classifications grouped Central and South-Central Dravidian in a single branch. On the other hand, Krishnamurti groups South-Central and South Dravidian together.\nSome authors deny that North Dravidian forms a valid subgroup, splitting it into Northeast (Kurukh\u2013Malto) and Northwest (Brahui). Their affiliation has been proposed based primarily on a small number of common phonetic developments, including:\nMcAlpin (2003) notes that no exact conditioning can be established for the first two changes, and proposes that distinct Proto-Dravidian *q and *k\u02b2 should be reconstructed behind these correspondences, and that Brahui, Kurukh-Malto, and the rest of Dravidian may be three coordinate branches, possibly with Brahui being the earliest language to split off. A few morphological parallels between Brahui and Kurukh-Malto are also known, but according to McAlpin they are analyzable as shared archaisms rather than shared innovations.\nIn addition, \"Ethnologue\" lists several unclassified Dravidian languages: Allar, Bazigar, Bharia, Malankuravan (possibly a dialect of Malayalam), and Vishavan. \"Ethnologue\" also lists several unclassified Southern Dravidian languages: Mala Malasar, Malasar, Thachanadan, Ullatan, Kalanadi, Kumbaran, Kunduvadi, Kurichiya, Attapady Kurumba, Muduga, Pathiya, and Wayanad Chetti.\nPattapu may also be Southern.\nA computational phylogenetic study of the Dravidian language family was undertaken by Kolipakam, et al. (2018). Kolipakam, et al. (2018) supports the internal coherence of the four Dravidian branches South (or South Dravidian I), South-Central (or South Dravidian II), Central, and North, but is uncertain about the precise relationships of these four branches to each other. The date of Dravidian is estimated to be 4,500 years old.\nDistribution.\nSince 1981, the Census of India has reported only languages with more than 10,000 speakers, including 17 Dravidian languages. In 1981, these accounted for approximately 24% of India's population.\nIn the 2001 census, they included 214 million people, about 21% of India's total population of 1.02 billion. In addition, the largest Dravidian-speaking group outside India, Tamil speakers in Sri Lanka, number around 4.7 million. The total number of speakers of Dravidian languages is around 227 million people, around 13% of the population of the Indian subcontinent.\nThe largest group of the Dravidian languages is South Dravidian, with almost 150 million speakers. Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam make up around 98% of the speakers, with 75 million, 44 million and 37 million native speakers, respectively.\nThe next-largest is the South-Central branch, which has 78 million native speakers, the vast majority of whom speak Telugu. The total number of speakers of Telugu, including those whose first language is not Telugu, is around 84 million people. This branch also includes the tribal language Gondi spoken in central India.\nThe second-smallest branch is the Northern branch, with around 6.3 million speakers. This is the only sub-group to have a language spoken in Pakistan \u2014 Brahui.\nThe smallest branch is the Central branch, which has only around 200,000 speakers. These languages are mostly tribal, and spoken in central India.\nLanguages recognized as official languages of India appear here in boldface.\nProposed relations with other families.\nThe Dravidian family has defied all of the attempts to show a connection with other languages, including Indo-European, Hurrian, Basque, Sumerian, Korean and Japanese. Comparisons have been made not just with the other language families of the Indian subcontinent (Indo-European, Austroasiatic, Sino-Tibetan, and Nihali), but with all typologically similar language families of the Old World. Nonetheless, although there are no readily detectable genealogical connections, Dravidian shares strong areal features with the Indo-Aryan languages, which have been attributed to a substratum influence from Dravidian.\nDravidian languages display typological similarities with the Uralic language group, suggesting to some a prolonged period of contact in the past. This idea is popular amongst Dravidian linguists and has been supported by a number of scholars, including Robert Caldwell, Thomas Burrow, Kamil Zvelebil, and Mikhail Andronov. This hypothesis has, however, been rejected by some specialists in Uralic languages, and has in recent times also been criticised by other Dravidian linguists such as Bhadriraju Krishnamurti.\nIn the early 1970s, the linguist David McAlpin produced a detailed proposal of a genetic relationship between Dravidian and the extinct Elamite language of ancient Elam (present-day southwestern Iran). The Elamo-Dravidian hypothesis was supported in the late 1980s by the archaeologist Colin Renfrew and the geneticist Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, who suggested that Proto-Dravidian was brought to India by farmers from the Iranian part of the Fertile Crescent. (In his 2000 book, Cavalli-Sforza suggested western India, northern India and northern Iran as alternative starting points.) However, linguists have found McAlpin's cognates unconvincing and criticized his proposed phonological rules as \"ad hoc\". Elamite is generally believed by scholars to be a language isolate, and the theory has had no effect on studies of the language. In 2012, Southworth suggested a \"Zagrosian family\" of West Asian origin including Elamite, Brahui and Dravidian as its three branches.\nDravidian is one of the primary language families in the Nostratic proposal, which would link most languages in North Africa, Europe and Western Asia into a family with its origins in the Fertile Crescent sometime between the Last Glacial Period and the emergence of Proto-Indo-European 4,000\u20136,000 BCE. However, the general consensus is that such deep connections are not, or not yet, demonstrable.\nPrehistory.\nThe origins of the Dravidian languages, as well as their subsequent development and the period of their differentiation are unclear, partially due to the lack of comparative linguistic research into the Dravidian languages. Though some scholars have argued that the Dravidian languages may have been brought to India by migrations in the fourth or third millennium BCE or even earlier, the Dravidian languages cannot easily be connected to any other language, and they could well be indigenous to India. Proto-Dravidian was spoken in the 4th or 3rd millennium BCE, and it is thought that the Dravidian languages were the most widespread indigenous languages in the Indian subcontinent before the advance of the Indo-Aryan languages.\nProto-Dravidian and onset of diversification.\nAs a proto-language, the Proto-Dravidian language is not itself attested in the historical record. Its modern conception is based solely on reconstruction. It was suggested in the 1980s that the language was spoken in the 4th millennium BCE, and started disintegrating into various branches around 3rd millennium BCE. According to Krishnamurti, Proto-Dravidian may have been spoken in the Indus civilization, suggesting a \"tentative date of Proto-Dravidian around the early part of the third millennium.\" Krishnamurti further states that South Dravidian I (including pre-Tamil) and South Dravidian II (including Pre-Telugu) split around the eleventh century BCE, with the other major branches splitting off at around the same time. Kolipakam et al. (2018) estimate the Dravidian language family to be approximately 4,500 years old.\nSeveral geneticists have noted a strong correlation between Dravidian and the Ancestral South Indian (ASI) component of South Asian genetic makeup. Narasimhan et al. (2018) argue that the ASI component itself resulted from a mixture of Iranian-related agriculturalists, moving southeast after the decline of the Indus Valley Civilization (early 2nd millennium BCE), and hunter-gatherers native to southern India. They conclude that one of these two groups may have been the source of proto-Dravidian.\nIntroduction from the northwest would be consistent with the location of Brahui and with attempts to interpret the Indus script as Dravidian. On the other hand, reconstructed Proto-Dravidian terms for flora and fauna provide some support for a south Indian origin.\nIndus Valley Civilisation.\nThe Indus Valley civilisation (3,300\u20131,900 BCE), located in Northwestern Indian subcontinent, is sometimes suggested to have been Dravidian. Already in 1924, when announcing the discovery of the IVC, John Marshall stated that (one of) the language(s) may have been Dravidic. Cultural and linguistic similarities have been cited by researchers Henry Heras, Kamil Zvelebil, Asko Parpola and Iravatham Mahadevan as being strong evidence for a proto-Dravidian origin of the ancient Indus Valley civilisation. The discovery in Tamil Nadu of a late Neolithic (early 2nd millennium BCE, i.e. post-dating Harappan decline) stone celt allegedly marked with Indus signs has been considered by some to be significant for the Dravidian identification.\nYuri Knorozov surmised that the symbols represent a logosyllabic script and suggested, based on computer analysis, an underlying agglutinative Dravidian language as the most likely candidate for the underlying language. Knorozov's suggestion was preceded by the work of Henry Heras, who suggested several readings of signs based on a proto-Dravidian assumption.\nLinguist Asko Parpola writes that the Indus script and Harappan language are \"most likely to have belonged to the Dravidian family\". Parpola led a Finnish team in investigating the inscriptions using computer analysis. Based on a proto-Dravidian assumption, they proposed readings of many signs, some agreeing with the suggested readings of Heras and Knorozov (such as equating the \"fish\" sign with the Dravidian word for fish, \"min\") but disagreeing on several other readings. A comprehensive description of Parpola's work until 1994 is given in his book \"Deciphering the Indus Script\".\nNorthern Dravidian pockets.\nAlthough in modern times speakers of the various Dravidian languages have mainly occupied the southern portion of India, in earlier times they probably were spoken in a larger area. After the Indo-Aryan migrations into north-western India, starting ca. 1500 BCE, and the establishment of the Kuru kingdom ca. 1100 BCE, a process of Sanskritisation of the masses started, which resulted in a language shift in northern India. Southern India has remained majority Dravidian, but pockets of Dravidian can be found in central India, Pakistan and Nepal.\nThe Kurukh and Malto are pockets of Dravidian languages in central India, spoken by people who may have migrated from south India. They do have myths about external origins. The Kurukh have traditionally claimed to be from the Deccan Peninsula, more specifically Karnataka. The same tradition has existed of the Brahui, who call themselves immigrants. Holding this same view of the Brahui are many scholars such as L.H. Horace Perera and M.Ratnasabapathy.\nThe Brahui population of Pakistan's Balochistan province has been taken by some as the linguistic equivalent of a relict population, perhaps indicating that Dravidian languages were formerly much more widespread and were supplanted by the incoming Indo-Aryan languages. However, it has been argued that the absence of any Old Iranian (Avestan) loanwords in Brahui suggests that the Brahui migrated to Balochistan from central India less than 1,000 years ago. The main Iranian contributor to Brahui vocabulary, Balochi, is a western Iranian language like Kurdish, and arrived in the area from the west only around 1000 CE. Sound changes shared with Kurukh and Malto also suggest that Brahui was originally spoken near them in central India.\nDravidian influence on Sanskrit.\nDravidian languages show extensive lexical (vocabulary) borrowing, but only a few traits of structural (either phonological or grammatical) borrowing from Indo-Aryan, whereas Indo-Aryan shows more structural than lexical borrowings from the Dravidian languages. Many of these features are already present in the oldest known Indo-Aryan language, the language of the \"Rigveda\" (c.1500 BCE), which also includes over a dozen words borrowed from Dravidian.\nVedic Sanskrit has retroflex consonants (/, ) with about 88 words in the \"Rigveda\" having unconditioned retroflexes. Some sample words are ', ', ', ', ' and '.\nSince other Indo-European languages, including other Indo-Iranian languages, lack retroflex consonants, their presence in Indo-Aryan is often cited as evidence of substrate influence from close contact of the Vedic speakers with speakers of a foreign language family rich in retroflex consonants. The Dravidian family is a serious candidate since it is rich in retroflex phonemes reconstructible back to the Proto-Dravidian stage.\nIn addition, a number of grammatical features of Vedic Sanskrit not found in its sister Avestan language appear to have been borrowed from Dravidian languages. These include the gerund, which has the same function as in Dravidian. Some linguists explain this asymmetrical borrowing by arguing that Middle Indo-Aryan languages were built on a Dravidian substratum. These scholars argue that the most plausible explanation for the presence of Dravidian structural features in Indic is language shift, that is, native Dravidian speakers learning and adopting Indic languages due to elite dominance. Although each of the innovative traits in Indic could be accounted for by internal explanations, early Dravidian influence is the only explanation that can account for all of the innovations at once; moreover, it accounts for several of the innovative traits in Indic better than any internal explanation that has been proposed.\nGrammar.\nThe most characteristic grammatical features of Dravidian languages are:\nPhonology.\nDravidian languages are noted for the lack of distinction between aspirated and unaspirated stops. While some Dravidian languages have accepted large numbers of loan words from Sanskrit and other Indo-Iranian languages in addition to their already vast vocabulary, in which the orthography shows distinctions in voice and aspiration, the words are pronounced in Dravidian according to different rules of phonology and phonotactics: aspiration of plosives is generally absent, regardless of the spelling of the word. This is not a universal phenomenon and is generally avoided in formal or careful speech, especially when reciting. For instance, Tamil does not distinguish between voiced and voiceless stops. In fact, the Tamil alphabet lacks symbols for voiced and aspirated stops. Dravidian languages are also characterized by a three-way distinction between dental, alveolar, and retroflex places of articulation as well as large numbers of liquids.\nProto-Dravidian.\nProto-Dravidian had five short and long vowels: \"*a\", \"*\u0101\", \"*i\", \"*\u012b\", \"*u\", \"*\u016b\", \"*e\", \"*\u0113\", \"*o\", \"*\u014d\". There were no diphthongs; \"ai\" and \"au\" are treated as *\"ay\" and *\"av\" (or *\"aw\").\nThe five-vowel system is largely preserved in the descendent subgroups.\nThe following consonantal phonemes are reconstructed:\nNumerals.\nThe numerals from 1 to 10 in various Dravidian and Indo-Aryan languages (here exemplified by Indo Aryan language Sanskrit and Iranian language Persian).\nLiterature.\nFour Dravidian languages, viz. Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Malayalam, have lengthy literary traditions.\nLiterature in Tulu and Kodava is more recent. Recently old literature in Gondi has been discovered as well.\nThe earliest known Dravidian inscriptions are 76 Old Tamil inscriptions on cave walls in Madurai and Tirunelveli districts in Tamil Nadu, dating from the 2nd century BCE.\nThese inscriptions are written in a variant of the Brahmi script called Tamil Brahmi.\nIn 2019, the Tamil Nadu Archaeology Department released a report on excavations at Keeladi, near Madurai, Tamil Nadu, including a description of potsherds dated to the 6th century BCE inscribed with personal names in the Tamil-Brahmi script.\nHowever, the report lacks the detail of a full archaeological study, and other archaeologists have disputed whether the oldest dates obtained for the site can be assigned to these potsherds.\nThe earliest long text in Old Tamil is the \"Tolk\u0101ppiyam\", a work on Tamil grammar and poetics preserved in a 5th-century CE redaction, whose oldest layers could date from the late 2nd century or 1st century BCE.\nKannada is first known from the Halmidi inscription (450 CE). A 9th-century treatise on poetics, the \"Kavirajamarga\", is the first literary work.\nThe earliest Telugu inscription, from Erragudipadu in Kadapa district, is dated 575. The first literary work is an 11th-century translation of part of the \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\".\nThe earliest Malayalam text is the Vazhappally copper plate (9th century). The first literary work is \"R\u0101macaritam\" (12th century)."}
{"id": "7923", "revid": "1124632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7923", "title": "Dracula", "text": "Dracula is an 1897 Gothic horror novel by Irish author Bram Stoker. It introduced the character of Count Dracula and established many conventions of subsequent vampire fantasy. The novel tells the story of Dracula's attempt to move from Transylvania to England so that he may find new blood and spread the undead curse, and of the battle between Dracula and a small group of people led by Professor Abraham Van Helsing.\n\"Dracula\" has been assigned to many literary genres including vampire literature, horror fiction, gothic fiction, and invasion literature. The novel has spawned numerous theatrical, film, and television interpretations.\nPlot.\n\"Dracula\" is an epistolary novel, told through letters, diary entries, newspaper articles, telegrams, and a ship's log. The novel is set mostly in Transylvania and England, and unfolds mostly chronologically between 3 May and 6 November.\nJonathan Harker, a newly qualified English solicitor, visits Count Dracula at his castle in the Carpathian Mountains to help the Count purchase a house near London. Ignoring the Count's warning, Harker wanders the castle and encounters three vampire women; Dracula rescues him, and Harker realises that he is a vampire, too. Soon after, Dracula leaves the castle, abandoning Harker to the women; Harker escapes with his life and ends up delirious in a Budapest hospital. Dracula takes a ship for England, with boxes of earth from his castle. The captain's log narrates the crew's disappearance, until he alone remains, bound to the helm to maintain course. An animal resembling a large dog is seen leaping ashore when the ship runs aground at Whitby.\nLucy Westenra's letter to her best friend, Harker's fianc\u00e9e Mina Murray, describes her marriage proposals from Dr. John Seward, Quincey Morris, and Arthur Holmwood. Lucy accepts Holmwood's, but all remain friends. Mina joins her friend Lucy on holiday in Whitby. Lucy begins sleepwalking. After his ship lands there, Dracula stalks Lucy. Mina receives a letter about her missing fianc\u00e9's illness, and goes to Budapest to nurse him. Lucy becomes very ill. Seward's old teacher, Professor Abraham Van Helsing, determines the nature of Lucy's condition, but refuses to disclose it. He diagnoses her with acute blood-loss. Van Helsing places garlic flowers around her room and makes her a necklace of them.\nLucy's mother removes the garlic flowers, not knowing they repel vampires. While Seward and Van Helsing are absent, Lucy and her mother are terrified by a wolf and Mrs. Westenra dies of a heart attack. Lucy dies shortly thereafter. After her burial, newspapers report children being stalked in the night by a beautiful lady, and Van Helsing deduces it is her. The four go to her tomb and see that she is a vampire. They stake her heart, behead her, and fill her mouth with garlic. Jonathan Harker and his now-wife Mina have returned, and they join the campaign against Dracula.\nEveryone stays at Dr. Seward's asylum as the men begin to hunt Dracula. Van Helsing finally shares what he knows about Dracula and vampires, so all will better understand Dracula's actions and predict his movements. Vampires can only rest on earth from their homeland. Dracula communicates with Seward's patient, Renfield, an insane man who eats vermin to absorb their life force. After Dracula learns of the group's plot against him, he uses Renfield to enter the asylum. He secretly attacks Mina three times, drinking her blood each time and forcing Mina to drink his blood on the final visit. She is cursed to become a vampire after her death unless Dracula is killed. \nAs the men find Dracula's properties, they also discover many earth boxes within. The vampire hunters open each of the boxes and seal wafers of the host inside them; the sacrament makes the boxes useless to Dracula. They attempt to trap Dracula in his Piccadilly house, but he escapes. They learn that Dracula is fleeing to his castle in Transylvania with his last box. Mina has a faint psychic connection to Dracula, which Van Helsing exploits via hypnosis to track Dracula's movements. Guided by Mina, they pursue him. \nIn Galatz, Romania, the hunters split up. Van Helsing and Mina go to Dracula's castle, where the professor destroys the vampire women. Jonathan Harker and Arthur Holmwood follow Dracula's boat on the river, while Quincey Morris and John Seward parallel them on land. After Dracula's box is finally loaded onto a wagon by Szgany men, the hunters converge and attack it. After routing the Szgany, Harker slashes Dracula's neck and Quincey stabs him in the heart. Dracula crumbles to dust, freeing Mina from her vampiric curse, and Quincey dies from his wounds. A note by Jonathan Harker seven years later states that the Harkers have a son, named Quincey.\nBackground.\nBetween 1879 and 1898, Stoker was a business manager for the Lyceum Theatre in London, where he supplemented his income by writing many sensational novels, his most successful being the vampire tale \"Dracula\" published on 26 May 1897. Parts of it are set around the English town of Whitby on the Yorkshire coast where he spent summer holidays.\nThroughout the 1880s and 1890s, authors such as H. Rider Haggard, Rudyard Kipling, Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle, and H. G. Wells wrote many tales in which fantastic creatures threatened to destroy life on Earth. Invasion literature was at a peak, and Stoker's formula was very familiar by 1897 to readers of fantastic adventure stories. Victorian readers enjoyed \"Dracula\" as a good adventure story like many others, but it did not reach its legendary status until later in the 20th century when film versions began to appear.\nBefore writing \"Dracula\", Stoker spent seven years researching European folklore and stories of vampires, being most influenced by Emily Gerard's 1885 essay \"Transylvania Superstitions\" which includes content about a vampire myth. The reputation for cruelty of the Romanian ruler of Wallachia Vlad III Dracula, which Stoker first learned about in 1881, inspired the name of the count Dracula. However, Dracula's scholar Elizabeth Miller has remarked that aside from the name and some mention of Romanian history, the background of Stoker's Count bears no resemblance to that of Vlad III Dracula. From 1890 to 1897 Stoker was a member of the London Library, where markings in Sabine Baring-Gould's \u201c\"Book of Were-Wolves\"\u201d, Thomas Browne's \u201c\"Pseudodoxica Epidemica\"\u201d, AF Crosse's \u201c\"Round About the Carpathians\"\u201d and Charles Boner's \u201c\"Transylvania\"\u201d are attributed to Stoker's research for \"Dracula\". Also some 1896 New York World clippings about Mercy Brown were found amongst Stoker's papers, but it is unsure how much the case could have influenced the novel. Later he also claimed that he had a nightmare, caused by eating too much crab meat, about a \"vampire king\" rising from his grave.\nThe Lyceum Theatre in the West End where Stoker worked between 1878 and 1898 was headed by actor-manager Henry Irving, who was Stoker's real-life inspiration for Dracula's mannerisms and who Stoker hoped would play Dracula in a stage version. Irving never did agree to do a stage version, but Dracula's dramatic sweeping gestures and gentlemanly mannerisms drew their living embodiment from Irving.\n\"The Dead Un-Dead\" was one of Stoker's original titles for \"Dracula\", and the manuscript was entitled simply \"The Un-Dead\" up until a few weeks before publication. Stoker's notes for \"Dracula\" show that the name of the count was originally \"Count Wampyr\", but Stoker became intrigued by the name \"Dracula\" while doing research, after reading William Wilkinson's book \"An Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia with Political Observations Relative to Them\" (London 1820), which he found in the Whitby Library and consulted a number of times during visits to Whitby in the 1890s. The name Dracula was the patronym (\"Dr\u0103culea\") of the descendants of Vlad II of Wallachia, who took the name \"Dracul\" after being invested in the Order of the Dragon in 1431. In the Old Romanian language, the word \"dracul\" (Romanian \"drac\" \"dragon\" + \"-ul\" \"the\") meant \"the dragon\" and Dracula meant \"son of the dragon\". In the present day however, dracul means \"the devil\".\nPublication.\n\"Dracula\" was published in London in May 1897 by Archibald Constable and Company. Costing six shillings, the novel was bound in yellow cloth and titled in red letters. It was copyrighted in the United States in 1899 with the publication by Doubleday &amp; McClure of New York. But when Universal Studios purchased the rights, it came to light that Bram Stoker had not complied with a portion of US copyright law, placing the novel into the public domain. In the United Kingdom and other countries following the Berne Convention on copyrights, the novel was under copyright until April 1962, fifty years after Stoker's death.\nReaction and scholarly criticism.\nReaction.\n\"Dracula\" was not an immediate bestseller when it was first published, although reviewers praised it. Some Victorian fans described it as \"the sensation of the season\" and \"the most blood-curdling novel of the paralysed century\". Sherlock Holmes author Arthur Conan Doyle wrote to Stoker in a letter, \"I write to tell you how very much I have enjoyed reading \"Dracula\". I think it is the very best story of diablerie which I have read for many years.\"\nAccording to literary historians Nina Auerbach and David J. Skal in the Norton Critical Edition, the novel has become more significant for modern readers than it was for Victorian readers, most of whom enjoyed it just as a adventure story. It reached its broad and iconic status only later in the 20th century when the movie versions appeared. A. Asbj\u00f8rn J\u00f8n has also noted that \"Dracula\" has had a significant impact on the image of the vampire in popular culture, folklore, and legend.\nIt did not make much money for Stoker. In the last year of his life, he was so poor that he had to petition for a compassionate grant from the Royal Literary Fund, and his widow was forced to sell his notes and outlines of the novel at a Sotheby's auction in 1913, where they were purchased for a little over \u00a32 (). But then F. W. Murnau's unauthorized adaptation of the story was released in theatres in 1922 in the form of \"Nosferatu\". Stoker's widow took affront and, during the legal battle that followed, the novel's popularity started to grow. \"Nosferatu\" was followed by a successful stage adaptation, touring the UK for three years before arriving in the US where Stoker's creation caught Hollywood's attention and, after the American 1931 movie version was released, the book has never been out of print.\nHistorical and geographical references.\nAttention was drawn to the supposed connections between the historical Transylvanian-born Vlad III Dracula (also known as Vlad Tepes) of Wallachia and Bram Stoker's fictional Dracula, following the publication of \"In Search of Dracula\" by Radu Florescu and Raymond T. McNally in 1972.\nDuring his main reign (1456\u20131462), \"Vlad the Impaler\" is said to have killed from 40,000 to 100,000 European civilians (political rivals, criminals, and anyone that he considered \"useless to humanity\"), mainly by impaling. The sources depicting these events are records by Saxon settlers in neighbouring Transylvania who had frequent clashes with Vlad III. Vlad III is revered as a folk hero by Romanians for driving off the invading Ottoman Turks, of whom his impaled victims are said to have included as many as 100,000. There is no solid evidence that the Count in the novel was modelled on Vlad the Impaler of Wallachia. At most, Stoker borrowed only the name Dracula and \"scraps of miscellaneous information\" about Romanian history, according to one expert, Elizabeth Miller; as well, and there are no comments about him in the author's working notes.\nHistorically, the name \"Dracula\" is derived from a order of chivalry called the Order of the Dragon, founded by Sigismund of Luxembourg (then king of Hungary) to uphold Christianity and defend the Holy Roman Empire against the Ottoman Turks. Vlad II Dracul, father of Vlad III, was admitted to the order around 1431, after which Vlad II wore the emblem of the order and later, as ruler of Wallachia, his coinage bore the dragon symbol, from which the name \"Dracula\" is derived since \"dracul\" in Romanian means \"the dragon\".\nMany of Stoker's biographers and literary critics have found strong similarities to the earlier Irish writer Sheridan Le Fanu's classic of the vampire genre \"Carmilla\". In writing \"Dracula\", Stoker may also have drawn on stories about the s\u00eddhe, some of which feature blood-drinking women. The Irish legend of Abhartach has also been suggested as a source. It is also thought probable that his mother's stories of events during the severe cholera outbreak in Sligo in 1832 were influential, particularly themes of being buried while alive.\nIn her book \"The Essential Dracula\", Clare Haword-Maden suggested that the castle of Count Dracula was inspired by Slains Castle, at which Bram Stoker was a guest of the 19th Earl of Erroll. According to Miller, he first visited Cruden Bay in 1893, three years after work had begun on \"Dracula\". Haining and Tremaine maintain that, during this visit, Stoker was especially impressed by Slains Castle's interior and the surrounding landscape. Miller and Leatherdale question the stringency of this connection.\nPossibly, Stoker was not inspired by a real edifice at all, but by Jules Verne's novel \"The Carpathian Castle\" (1892) or Ann Radcliffe's \"The Mysteries of Udolpho\" (1794). A third possibility is that he copied information about Kem\u00e9ny Castle at V\u00e9cs from one of his sources on Transylvania, the book by Major E.C. Johnson. A further option is that Stoker saw an illustration of Castle Bran (T\u00f6rzburg) in the book on Transylvania by Charles Boner, or read about it in the books by Mazuchelli or Crosse.\nMany of the scenes in Whitby and London are based on real places that Stoker frequently visited, although he distorts the geography for the sake of the story in some cases. One scholar has suggested that Stoker chose Whitby as the site of Dracula's first appearance in England because of the Synod of Whitby, given the novel's preoccupation with timekeeping and calendar disputes.\nOfficial derivative publications.\n\"Dracula's Guest\".\nThe short story \"Dracula's Guest\" was posthumously published in 1914, two years after Stoker's death. It was, according to most contemporary critics, the deleted first (or second) chapter from the original manuscript and the one which gave the volume its name, but which the original publishers deemed unnecessary to the overall story.\n\"Dracula's Guest\" follows an unnamed Englishman traveller as he wanders around Munich before leaving for Transylvania. It is Walpurgis Night and the young Englishman foolishly leaves his hotel, in spite of the coachman's warnings, and wanders through a dense forest alone. Along the way, he feels that he is being watched by a tall and thin stranger (possibly Count Dracula).\nThe short story climaxes in an old graveyard where the Englishman, caught in a blizzard, takes refuge in the marble tomb of \"Countess Dolingen of Gratz\". Within the tomb, he sees the Countess\u2014apparently asleep and healthy\u2014but before he can investigate further, a mysterious force throws him clear of the tomb. A lightning bolt then strikes the tomb, destroying it and incinerating the undead screaming countess. The Englishman then loses consciousness. He awakens to find a \"gigantic\" wolf lying on his chest and licking at his throat; however, the wolf merely keeps him warm and protects him until help arrives.\nWhen the Englishman is finally taken back to his hotel, a telegram awaits him from his expectant host Dracula, with a warning about \"dangers from snow and wolves and night\". The Swedish scholar Rickard Berghorn noted that the description of the blonde countess in \"Dracula's Guest\" closely resembled the description of Josephine in the \"Powers of Darkness\", which he used to argue that the countess and Josephine were meant to be the same character.\n\"Powers of Darkness\".\nIn 1901, \"Dracula\" was translated into Icelandic by Valdimar \u00c1smundsson under the title \"Makt Myrkranna\" (\"Powers of Darkness\") with a preface written by Stoker. Not until 2014 was it noticed that \"Makt Myrkranna\" differed significantly from Stoker's version of \"Dracula\". The characters had different names, the book was shorter and there was more emphasis on sex than in the English version. The Dutch scholar Hans Corneel de Roos wrote: \"Although \"Dracula\" received positive reviews in most newspapers of the day...the original novel can be tedious and meandering...\"Powers of Darkness\", by contrast, is written in a concise, punchy style; each scene adds to the progress of the plot.\" In \"Makt Myrkranna\", Dracula is in contact with various ambassadors in what is hinted at is a bid for world domination. The majority of \"Makt Myrkranna\" concerns Thomas Harker's (as Jonathan Harker is called here) stay at Dracula's castle in Transylvania, with the rest of novel being a rushed and barely fleshed out story.\nDe Roos has argued that the differences between the English original of \"Dracula\" and the Icelandic version were not due to changes made by \u00c1smundsson, but rather that he was using a different, older manuscript of \"Dracula\" provided to him by Stoker, which the latter had discarded for the English version. De Roos has argued that some aspects of \"Makt Myrkranna\" were due to \u00c1smundsson and other aspects were parts of \"Dracula\" that Stoker had removed due to concerns about government censorship.\nAdaptations.\nThe story of \"Dracula\" has been the basis for numerous films and plays. Stoker himself wrote the first theatrical adaptation, which was presented at the Lyceum Theatre on 18 May 1897 under the title \"Dracula, or The Undead\" shortly before the novel's publication and performed only once, in order to establish his own copyright for such adaptations. This adaption was first published only a century later in October 1997. The first motion picture to feature Dracula was \"Dracula's Death\", produced in Hungary in 1921. The now-lost film, however, was not an adaptation of Stoker's novel, but featured an original story.\nF. W. Murnau's unauthorised film adaptation \"Nosferatu\" was released in 1922, and the popularity of the novel increased considerably, owing to an attempt by Stoker's widow to have the film removed from public circulation. Prana Film, the production company, had been unable to obtain permission to adapt the story from Bram's widow Florence Stoker, so screenwriter Henrik Galeen was told to alter numerous details to avoid legal trouble. Galeen transplanted the action of the story from 1890s England to 1830s Germany and reworked several characters, dropping some (such as Lucy and all three of her suitors), and renaming others (Dracula became Orlok, Jonathan Harker became Thomas Hutter, Mina became Ellen, and so on). This attempt failed to avoid a court case, however; Florence Stoker sued Prana Film, and all copies of the film were ordered to be destroyed. However, the company was bankrupt, and Stoker only recovered her legal fees in damages. Some copies survived and found their way into theatres. Eventually, Florence Stoker gave up the fight against public displays of the film. Subsequent rereleases of the film have typically undone some of the changes, such as restoring the original character names (a practice also followed by Werner Herzog in his 1979 remake of Murnau's film \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\").\nFlorence Stoker licensed the story to playwright Hamilton Deane, whose 1924 stage play adaptation toured England for several years before settling down in London. In 1927, American stage producer Horace Liveright hired John L. Balderston to revise Deane's script in advance of its American premiere. Balderston significantly compressed the story, most notably consolidating or removing several characters. The Deane play and its Balderston revisions introduced an expanded role and history for Renfield, who now replaced Jonathan Harker as Dracula's solicitor in the first part of the story; combined Mina Harker and Lucy Westenra into a single character named Lucy (though both Mina and Lucy would appear in the subsequent film); and omitted both Arthur Holmwood and Quincey Morris entirely. When the play premiered in New York, it was with Bela Lugosi in the title role, and with Edward Van Sloan as Abraham Van Helsing, roles which both actors (as well as Herbert Bunston as Dr. Seward) reprised for the English-language version of the 1931 Universal Pictures film production. The 1931 film was one of the most commercially successful adaptations of the story to date; it and the Deane/Balderston play that preceded it set the standard for film and television adaptations of the story, with the alterations to the novel becoming standard for later adaptations for decades to come. Universal Studios continued to feature the character of Dracula in many of their horror films from the 1930s and 1940s.\nIn 1958, film company Hammer Film Productions followed the success of its \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" from the previous year with \"Dracula\", released in the United States as \"Horror of Dracula\", directed by Terence Fisher. Fisher's production featured Christopher Lee as Dracula and Peter Cushing as Van Helsing. It was an international hit for Hammer Film, and Lee fixed the image of the fanged vampire in popular culture. Both Lee and Cushing reprised their roles multiple times over the next decade and a half, concluding with \"The Legend of the 7 Golden Vampires\" (with Cushing but not Lee) in 1974. Christopher Lee also took on the role of Dracula in \"Count Dracula\", a 1970 Spanish-Italian-German co-production notable for its adherence to the plot of the original novel. Playing the part of Renfield in that version was Klaus Kinski, who later played Dracula himself in 1979's \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\".\nIn 1977, the BBC made \"Count Dracula\", a 155-minute adaptation for television starring Louis Jourdan. Later film adaptations include John Badham's 1979 \"Dracula\", starring Frank Langella and inspired by the 1977 Broadway revival of the Deane/Hamilton play, and Francis Ford Coppola's 1992 \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\", starring Gary Oldman. The character of Count Dracula has remained popular over the years, and many films have used the character as a villain, while others have named him in their titles, including \"Dracula's Daughter\" and \"The Brides of Dracula\"."}
{"id": "7925", "revid": "7545891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7925", "title": "David Hume", "text": "David Hume (; born David Home; 7 May 1711 NS \u2013 25 August 1776) was a Scottish Enlightenment philosopher, historian, economist, librarian and essayist, who is best known today for his highly influential system of philosophical empiricism, skepticism, and naturalism. Beginning with \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1739\u201340), Hume strove to create a naturalistic science of man that examined the psychological basis of human nature. Hume argued against the existence of innate ideas, positing that all human knowledge derives solely from experience. This places him with Francis Bacon, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, and George Berkeley as a British Empiricist.\nHume argued that inductive reasoning and belief in causality cannot be justified rationally; instead, they result from custom and mental habit. We never actually perceive that one event causes another but only experience the \"constant conjunction\" of events. This problem of induction means that to draw any causal inferences from past experience, it is necessary to presuppose that the future will resemble the past, a presupposition which cannot itself be grounded in prior experience.\nAn opponent of philosophical rationalists, Hume held that passions rather than reason govern human behaviour, famously proclaiming that \"Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions.\" Hume was also a sentimentalist who held that ethics are based on emotion or sentiment rather than abstract moral principle. He maintained an early commitment to naturalistic explanations of moral phenomena and is usually taken to have first clearly expounded the is\u2013ought problem, or the idea that a statement of fact alone can never give rise to a normative conclusion of what \"ought\" to be done.\nHume also denied that humans have an actual conception of the self, positing that we experience only a bundle of sensations, and that the self is nothing more than this bundle of causally-connected perceptions. Hume's compatibilist theory of free will takes causal determinism as fully compatible with human freedom. His views on philosophy of religion, including his rejection of miracles and the argument from design for God's existence, were especially controversial for their time.\nHume influenced utilitarianism, logical positivism, the philosophy of science, early analytic philosophy, cognitive science, theology, and many other fields and thinkers. Immanuel Kant credited Hume as the inspiration who had awakened him from his \"dogmatic slumbers.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nHume was born on 26 April 1711 (Old Style), as David Home, in a tenement on the northside of Edinburgh's Lawnmarket. He was the second of two sons to Joseph Home, an advocate of Ninewells, and Katherine Home (n\u00e9e Falconer), daughter of Sir David Falconer. Joseph died just after David's second birthday. Katherine, who never remarried, raised the two brothers and their sister on her own.\nHume changed his family name's spelling in 1734, as the surname 'Home' (pronounced like 'Hume') was not well-known in England. Hume never married and lived partly at his Chirnside family home in Berwickshire, which had belonged to the family since the 16th century. His finances as a young man were very \"slender\", as his family was not rich and, as a younger son, he had little patrimony to live on.\nHume attended the University of Edinburgh at an unusually early ageeither 12 or possibly as young as 10at a time when 14 was the typical age. Initially, Hume considered a career in law, because of his family. However, in his words, he came to have: \u2026an insurmountable aversion to everything but the pursuits of Philosophy and general Learning; and while [my family] fanceyed I was poring over Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the Authors which I was secretly devouring.He had little respect for the professors of his time, telling a friend in 1735 that \"there is nothing to be learnt from a Professor, which is not to be met with in Books\". He did not graduate.\n\"Disease of the learned\".\nAged 18 or so, Hume made a philosophical discovery that opened him up to \"a new Scene of Thought\", inspiring him \"to throw up every other Pleasure or Business to apply entirely to it\". As he did not recount what this scene exactly was, commentators have offered a variety of speculations. One prominent interpretation among contemporary Humean scholarship is that this new \"scene of thought\" was Hume's realisation that Francis Hutcheson's theory of \"moral sense\" could be applied to the understanding of morality as well.\nFrom this inspiration, Hume set out to spend a minimum of 10 years reading and writing. He soon came to the verge of a mental breakdown, first starting with a coldnesswhich he attributed to a \"Laziness of Temper\"that lasted about nine months. Later, some scurvy spots broke out on his fingers, persuading Hume's physician to diagnose Hume as suffering from the \"Disease of the Learned\".\nHume wrote that he \"went under a Course of Bitters and Anti-Hysteric Pills\", taken along with a pint of claret every day. He also decided to have a more active life to better continue his learning. His health improved somewhat, but in 1731 he was afflicted with a ravenous appetite and palpitations of the heart. After eating well for a time, he went from being \"tall, lean and raw-bon'd\" to being \"sturdy, robust [and] healthful-like.\" Indeed, Hume would become well known for being obese and a fondness for good port and cheese.\nCareer.\nAlthough having noble ancestry, at 25 years of age, Hume had no source of income and no learned profession. As was common at his time, he became a merchant's assistant, despite having to leave his native Scotland. He travelled via Bristol to La Fl\u00e8che in Anjou, France. There he had frequent discourse with the Jesuits of the College of La Fl\u00e8che.\nHume was derailed in his attempts to start a university career by protests over his alleged \"atheism\", also lamenting that his literary debut, \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", \"fell dead-born from the press.\" However, he found literary success in his lifetime as an essayist, and a career as a librarian at the University of Edinburgh. His tenure there, and the access to research materials it provided, resulted in Hume's writing the massive six-volume \"The History of England\", which became a bestseller and the standard history of England in its day. For over 60 years, Hume was the dominant interpreter of English history. He described his \"love for literary fame\" as his \"ruling passion\" and judged his two late works, the so-called \"first\" and \"second\" enquiries, \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\" and \"An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals\", as his greatest literary and philosophical achievements. He would ask of his contemporaries to judge him on the merits of the later texts alone, rather than on the more radical formulations of his early, youthful work, dismissing his philosophical debut as juvenilia: \"A work which the Author had projected before he left College.\" Despite Hume's protestations, a consensus exists today that his most important arguments and philosophically distinctive doctrines are found in the original form they take in the \"Treatise\". Though he was only 23 years old when starting this work, it is now regarded as one of the most important in the history of Western philosophy.\n1730s.\nHume worked for four years on his first major work, \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", subtitled \"Being an Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects\", completing it in 1738 at the age of 28. Although many scholars today consider the \"Treatise\" to be Hume's most important work and one of the most important books in Western philosophy, critics in Great Britain at the time described it as \"abstract and unintelligible\". As Hume had spent most of his savings during those four years, he resolved \"to make a very rigid frugality supply [his] deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every object as contemptible except the improvements of my talents in literature\".\nDespite the disappointment, Hume later wrote: \"Being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I soon recovered from the blow and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the country.\" There, in an attempt to make his larger work better known and more intelligible, he published the \"An Abstract of a Book lately Published\" as a summary of the main doctrines of the \"Treatise\", without revealing its authorship. Although there has been some academic speculation as to who actually wrote this pamphlet, it is generally regarded as Hume's creation.\n1740s.\nAfter the publication of \"Essays Moral and Political\" in 1741included in the later edition as \"Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary\"Hume applied for the Chair of Pneumatics and Moral Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh. However, the position was given to William Cleghorn after Edinburgh ministers petitioned the town council not to appoint Hume because he was seen as an atheist.\nIn 1745, during the Jacobite risings, Hume tutored the Marquess of Annandale (1720\u201392), an engagement that ended in disarray after about a year. Hume then started his great historical work, \"The History of England\", taking fifteen years and running to over a million words. During this time he was also involved with the Canongate Theatre through his friend John Home, a preacher.\nIn this context, he associated with Lord Monboddo and other Scottish Enlightenment luminaries in Edinburgh. From 1746, Hume served for three years as secretary to General James St Clair, who was envoy to the courts of Turin and Vienna. At that time Hume also wrote \"Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding\", later published as \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\". Often called the \"First Enquiry\", it proved little more successful than the \"Treatise\", perhaps because of the publication of his short autobiography \"My Own Life\", which \"made friends difficult for the first Enquiry\".\nIn 1749 he went to live with his brother in the countryside, although he associated with Lord Monboddo and other Scottish Enlightenment luminaries in Edinburgh.\n1750s-mid 1760s.\nHume's religious views were often suspect and, in the 1750s, it was necessary for his friends to avert a trial against him on the charge of heresy, specifically in an ecclesiastical court. However, he \"would not have come and could not be forced to attend if he said he was not a member of the Established Church\". Hume failed to gain the chair of philosophy at the University of Glasgow due to his religious views. By this time, he had published the \"Philosophical Essays\", which were decidedly anti-religious. Even Adam Smith, his personal friend who had vacated the Glasgow philosophy chair, was against his appointment out of concern that public opinion would be against it.\nHume returned to Edinburgh in 1751. In the following year, the Faculty of Advocates hired him to be their Librarian, a job in which he would receive little to no pay, but which nonetheless gave him \"the command of a large library\". This resource enabled him to continue historical research for \"The History of England\". Hume's volume of \"Political Discourses\", written in 1749 and published by Kincaid &amp; Donaldson in 1752, was the only work he considered successful on first publication.\nEventually, with the publication of his six-volume \"The History of England\" between 1754 and 1762, Hume achieved the fame that he coveted. The volumes traced events from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688, and was a bestseller in its day. Hume was also a longtime friend of bookseller Andrew Millar, who sold Hume's \"History\" (after acquiring the rights from Scottish bookseller Gavin Hamilton), although the relationship was sometimes complicated. Letters between them illuminate both men's interest in the success of the \"History\". In 1762 Hume moved from Jack's Land on the Canongate to James Court on the Lawnmarket. He sold the house to James Boswell in 1766.\nLater years.\nFrom 1763 to 1765, Hume was invited to attend Lord Hertford in Paris, where he became secretary to the British embassy. Hume was well received in Paris, and while there he met with Isaac de Pinto.\nIn 1766, Hume left Paris to accompany Jean-Jacques Rousseau to England. Once there, he and Rousseau fell out, leaving Hume sufficiently worried about the damage to his reputation from the quarrel with Rousseau. So much so, that Hume would author an account of the dispute, titling it \"A concise and genuine account of the dispute between Mr. Hume and Mr. Rousseau\".\nIn 1765, Hume served as British Charg\u00e9 d'affaires, writing \"despatches to the British Secretary of State\". He wrote of his Paris life, \"I really wish often for the plain roughness of The Poker Club of Edinburgh\u2026to correct and qualify so much lusciousness.\" In 1766, upon returning to Britain, Hume encouraged his patron Lord Hertford to invest in a number of slave plantations, acquired by George Colebrooke and others in the Windward Islands. In June 1766 Hume facilitated the purchase of the slave plantation by writing to Victor-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Charpentier, marquis d'Ennery, the French governor of Martinique, on behalf of his friend, John Stewart, a wine merchant and lent Stewart \u00a3400 earlier in the same year. According to Dr. Felix Waldmann, a former Hume Fellow at the University of Edinburgh, Hume's \"puckish scepticism about the existence of religious miracles played a significant part in defining the critical outlook which underpins the practice of modern science. But his views served to reinforce the institution of racialised slavery in the later 18th century.\"\nIn 1767, Hume was appointed Under Secretary of State for the Northern Department. Here, he wrote that he was given \"all the secrets of the Kingdom\". In 1769 he returned to James' Court in Edinburgh, where he would live from 1771 until his death in 1776.\nHume's nephew and namesake, David Hume of Ninewells (1757\u20131838), was a co-founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783. He was a Professor of Scots Law at Edinburgh University and rose to be Principal Clerk of Session in the Scottish High Court and Baron of the Exchequer. He is buried with his uncle in Old Calton Cemetery.\nAutobiography.\nIn the last year of his life, Hume wrote an extremely brief autobiographical essay titled \"My Own Life\", summing up his entire life in \"fewer than 5 pages\", and notably contains many interesting judgments that have been of enduring interest to subsequent readers of Hume. Donald Seibert (1984), a scholar of 18th-century literature, judged it a \"remarkable autobiography, even though it may lack the usual attractions of that genre. Anyone hankering for startling revelations or amusing anecdotes had better look elsewhere.\"\nDespite condemning vanity as a dangerous passion, in his autobiography Hume confesses his belief that the \"love of literary fame\" had served as his \"ruling passion\" in life, and claims that this desire \"never soured my temper, notwithstanding my frequent disappointments\". One such disappointment Hume discusses in this account is in the initial literary reception of the \"Treatise\", which he claims to have overcome by means of the success of the \"Essays\": \"the work was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment\". Hume, in his own retrospective judgment, argues that his philosophical debut's apparent failure \"had proceeded more from the manner than the matter\". He thus suggests that \"I had been guilty of a very usual indiscretion, in going to the press too early.\"\nHume also provides an unambiguous self-assessment of the relative value of his works: that \"my Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals; which, in my own opinion (who ought not to judge on that subject) is of all my writings, historical, philosophical, or literary, incomparably the best.\" He also wrote of his social relations: \"My company was not unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the studious and literary\", noting of his complex relation to religion, as well as to the state, that \"though I wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and religious factions, they seemed to be disarmed in my behalf of their wonted fury\". He goes on to profess of his character: \"My friends never had occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of my character and conduct.\" Hume concludes the essay with a frank admission:I cannot say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared and ascertained.\nDeath.\nDiarist and biographer James Boswell saw Hume a few weeks before his death from a form of abdominal cancer. Hume told him that he sincerely believed it a \"most unreasonable fancy\" that there might be life after death. asked that his body be interred in a \"simple Roman tomb\", requesting in his will that it be inscribed only with his name and the year of his birth and death, \"leaving it to Posterity to add the Rest\".\nDavid Hume died at the southwest corner of St. Andrew's Square in Edinburgh's New Town, at what is now 21 Saint David Street. A popular story, consistent with some historical evidence, suggests that the street was named after Hume.\nHis tomb stands, as he wished it, on the southwestern slope of Calton Hill, in the Old Calton Cemetery. Adam Smith later recounted Hume's amusing speculation that he might ask Charon, Hades' ferryman, to allow him a few more years of life in order to see \"the downfall of some of the prevailing systems of superstition\". The ferryman replied, \"You loitering rogue, that will not happen these many hundred years.\u2026 Get into the boat this instant.\"\nWritings.\n\"A Treatise of Human Nature\" begins with the introduction: \"'Tis evident, that all the sciences have a relation, more or less, to human nature.\u2026 Even Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Natural Religion, are in some measure dependent on the science of Man.\" The science of man, as Hume explains, is the \"only solid foundation for the other sciences\" and that the method for this science requires both experience and observation as the foundations of a logical argument. In regards to this, philosophical historian Frederick Copleston (1999) suggests that it was Hume's aim to apply to the science of man the method of experimental philosophy (the term that was current at the time to imply Natural philosophy), and that \"Hume's plan is to extend to philosophy in general the methodological limitations of Newtonian physics.\"\nUntil recently, Hume was seen as a forerunner of logical positivism, a form of anti-metaphysical empiricism. According to the logical positivists (in summary of their verification principle), unless a statement could be verified by experience, or else was true or false by definition (i.e. either tautological or contradictory), then it was meaningless. Hume, on this view, was a proto-positivist, who, in his philosophical writings, attempted to demonstrate the ways in which ordinary propositions about objects, causal relations, the self, and so on, are semantically equivalent to propositions about one's experiences.\nMany commentators have since rejected this understanding of Humean empiricism, stressing an epistemological (rather than a semantic) reading of his project. According to this opposing view, Hume's empiricism consisted in the idea that it is our knowledge, and not our ability to conceive, that is restricted to what can be experienced. Hume thought that we can form beliefs about that which extends beyond any possible experience, through the operation of faculties such as custom and the imagination, but he was sceptical about claims to knowledge on this basis.\nImpressions and ideas.\nA central doctrine of Hume's philosophy, stated in the very first lines of the \"Treatise of Human Nature\", is that the mind consists of perceptions, or the mental objects which are present to it, and which divide into two categories: \"All the perceptions of the human mind resolve themselves into two distinct kinds, which I shall call and .\" Hume believed that it would \"not be very necessary to employ many words in explaining this distinction\", which commentators have generally taken to mean the distinction between \"feeling\" and \"thinking\". Controversially, Hume, in some sense, may regard the distinction as a matter of degree, as he takes \"impressions\" to be distinguished from ideas on the basis of their force, liveliness, and vivacitywhat Henry E. Allison (2008) calls the \"FLV criterion.\" \"Ideas\" are therefore \"faint\" impressions. For example, experiencing the painful sensation of touching a hot pan's handle is more forceful than simply thinking about touching a hot pan. According to Hume, \"impressions\" are meant to be the original form of all our ideas. From this, Don Garrett (2002) has coined the term \"copy principle,\" referring to Hume's doctrine that all ideas are ultimately copied from some original impression, whether it be a passion or sensation, from which they derive.\nSimple and complex.\nAfter establishing the forcefulness of impressions and ideas, these two categories are further broken down into \"simple\" and \"complex\": \"simple perceptions or impressions and ideas are such as admit of no distinction nor separation\", whereas \"the complex are the contrary to these, and may be distinguished into parts\". When looking at an apple, a person experiences a variety of colour-sensationswhat Hume notes as a complex impression. Similarly, a person experiences a variety of taste-sensations, tactile-sensations, and smell-sensations when biting into an apple, with the overall sensationagain, a complex impression. Thinking about an apple allows a person to form complex ideas, which are made of similar parts as the complex impressions they were developed from, but which are also less forceful. Hume believes that complex perceptions can be broken down into smaller and smaller parts until perceptions are reached that have no parts of their own, and these perceptions are thus referred to as simple.\nPrinciples of association.\nRegardless of how boundless it may seem, a person's imagination is confined to the mind's ability to recombine the information it has already acquired from the body's sensory experience (the ideas that have been derived from impressions). In addition, \"as our imagination takes our most basic ideas and leads us to form new ones, it is directed by three principles of association, namely, resemblance, contiguity, and cause and effect\":\nHume elaborates more on the last principle, explaining that, when somebody observes that one object or event consistently produces the same object or event, that results in \"an expectation that a particular event (a 'cause') will be followed by another event (an 'effect') previously and constantly associated with it\". Hume calls this principle \"custom\", or \"habit\", saying that \"custom...renders our experience useful to us, and makes us expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past\". However, even though custom can serve as a guide in life, it still only represents an expectation. In other words: Experience cannot establish a necessary connection between cause and effect, because we can imagine without contradiction a case where the cause does not produce its usual effect\u2026the reason why we mistakenly infer that there is something in the cause that necessarily produces its effect is because our past experiences have habituated us to think in this way. Continuing this idea, Hume argues that \"only in the pure realm of ideas, logic, and mathematics, not contingent on the direct sense awareness of reality, [can] causation safely\u2026be applied\u2014all other sciences are reduced to probability\". He uses this scepticism to reject metaphysics and many theological views on the basis that they are not grounded in fact and observations, and are therefore beyond the reach of human understanding.\nInduction and causation.\nThe cornerstone of Hume's epistemology is the problem of induction. This may be the area of Hume's thought where his scepticism about human powers of reason is most pronounced. The problem revolves around the plausibility of inductive reasoning, that is, reasoning from the observed behaviour of objects to their behaviour when unobserved. As Hume wrote, induction concerns how things behave when they go \"beyond the present testimony of the senses, or the records of our memory\". Hume argues that we tend to believe that things behave in a regular manner, meaning that patterns in the behaviour of objects seem to persist into the future, and throughout the unobserved present. Hume's argument is that we cannot rationally justify the claim that nature will continue to be uniform, as justification comes in only two varieties\u2014demonstrative reasoning and probable reasoning\u2014and both of these are inadequate. With regard to demonstrative reasoning, Hume argues that the uniformity principle cannot be demonstrated, as it is \"consistent and conceivable\" that nature might stop being regular. Turning to probable reasoning, Hume argues that we cannot hold that nature will continue to be uniform because it has been in the past. As this is using the very sort of reasoning (induction) that is under question, it would be circular reasoning. Thus, no form of justification will rationally warrant our inductive inferences.\nHume's solution to this problem is to argue that, rather than reason, natural instinct explains the human practice of making inductive inferences. He asserts that \"Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable [\"sic\"] necessity has determin'd us to judge as well as to breathe and feel.\" In 1985, and in agreement with Hume, John D. Kenyon writes: Reason might manage to raise a doubt about the truth of a conclusion of natural inductive inference just for a moment\u00a0... but the sheer agreeableness of animal faith will protect us from excessive caution and sterile suspension of belief.Others, such as Charles Sanders Peirce, have demurred from Hume's solution, while some, such as Kant and Karl Popper, have thought that Hume's analysis has \"posed a most fundamental challenge to all human knowledge claims\".\nThe notion of causation is closely linked to the problem of induction. According to Hume, we reason inductively by associating constantly conjoined events. It is the mental act of association that is the basis of our concept of causation. At least three interpretations of Hume's theory of causation are represented in the literature:\nHume acknowledged that there are events constantly unfolding, and humanity cannot guarantee that these events are caused by prior events or are independent instances. He opposed the widely accepted theory of causation that 'all events have a specific course or reason'. Therefore, Hume crafted his own theory of causation, formed through his empiricist and sceptic beliefs. He split causation into two realms: \"All the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, Relations of Ideas, and Matters of Fact.\" Relations of Ideas are \"a priori\" and represent universal bonds between ideas that mark the cornerstones of human thought. Matters of Fact are dependent on the observer and experience. They are often not universally held to be true among multiple persons. Hume was an Empiricist, meaning he believed \"causes and effects are discoverable not by reason, but by experience\". He goes on to say that, even with the perspective of the past, humanity cannot dictate future events because thoughts of the past are limited, compared to the possibilities for the future. Hume's separation between Matters of Fact and Relations of Ideas is often referred to as \"Hume's fork.\"\nHume explains his theory of causation and causal inference by division into three different parts. In these three branches he explains his ideas and compares and contrasts his views to his predecessors. These branches are the Critical Phase, the Constructive Phase, and Belief. In the Critical Phase, Hume denies his predecessors' theories of causation. Next, he uses the Constructive Phase to resolve any doubts the reader may have had while observing the Critical Phase. \"Habit or Custom\" mends the gaps in reasoning that occur without the human mind even realising it. Associating ideas has become second nature to the human mind. It \"makes us expect for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past\". However, Hume says that this association cannot be trusted because the span of the human mind to comprehend the past is not necessarily applicable to the wide and distant future. This leads him to the third branch of causal inference, Belief. Belief is what drives the human mind to hold that expectancy of the future is based on past experience. Throughout his explanation of causal inference, Hume is arguing that the future is not certain to be repetition of the past and that the only way to justify induction is through uniformity.\nThe logical positivist interpretation is that Hume analyses causal propositions, such as \"A causes B\", in terms of regularities in perception: \"A causes B\" is equivalent to \"Whenever A-type events happen, B-type ones follow\", where \"whenever\" refers to all possible perceptions. In his \"Treatise of Human Nature\", Hume wrote:\nPower and necessity\u2026are\u2026qualities of perceptions, not of objects\u2026felt by the soul and not perceiv'd externally in bodies.\nThis view is rejected by sceptical realists, who argue that Hume thought that causation amounts to more than just the regular succession of events. Hume said that, when two events are causally conjoined, a necessary connection underpins the conjunction:\nShall we rest contented with these two relations of contiguity and succession, as affording a complete idea of causation? By no means\u2026there is a \"necessary connexion\" to be taken into consideration.\nAngela Coventry writes that, for Hume, \"there is nothing in any particular instance of cause and effect involving external objects which suggests the idea of power or necessary connection\" and \"we are ignorant of the powers that operate between objects\". However, while denying the possibility of knowing the powers between objects, Hume accepted the causal principle, writing: \"I never asserted so absurd a proposition as that something could arise without a cause.\"\nIt has been argued that, while Hume did not think that causation is reducible to pure regularity, he was not a fully fledged realist either. Simon Blackburn calls this a quasi-realist reading, saying that \"Someone talking of cause is voicing a distinct mental set: he is by no means in the same state as someone merely describing regular sequences.\" In Hume's words, \"nothing is more usual than to apply to external bodies every internal sensation, which they occasion\".\nThe 'self'.\nEmpiricist philosophers, such as Hume and Berkeley, favoured the bundle theory of personal identity. In this theory, \"the mind itself, far from being an independent power, is simply 'a bundle of perceptions' without unity or cohesive quality\". The self is nothing but a bundle of experiences linked by the relations of causation and resemblance; or, more accurately, the empirically warranted idea of the self is just the idea of such a bundle. According to Hume:\nThis view is supported by, for example, positivist interpreters, who have seen Hume as suggesting that terms such as \"self\", \"person\", or \"mind\" refer to collections of \"sense-contents\". A modern-day version of the bundle theory of the mind has been advanced by Derek Parfit in his \"Reasons and Persons\".\nHowever, some philosophers have criticised Hume's bundle-theory interpretation of personal identity. They argue that distinct selves can have perceptions that stand in relation to similarity and causality. Thus, perceptions must already come parcelled into distinct \"bundles\" before they can be associated according to the relations of similarity and causality. In other words, the mind must already possess a unity that cannot be generated, or constituted, by these relations alone. Since the bundle-theory interpretation portrays Hume as answering an ontological question, philosophers like Galen Strawson see Hume as not very concerned with such questions and have queried whether this view is really Hume's. Instead, Strawson suggests that Hume might have been answering an epistemological question about the causal origin of our concept of the self. In the Appendix to the \"Treatise\", Hume declares himself dissatisfied with his earlier account of personal identity in Book 1. Corliss Swain notes that \"Commentators agree that if Hume did find some new problem\" when he reviewed the section on personal identity, \"he wasn't forthcoming about its nature in the Appendix.\" One interpretation of Hume's view of the self, argued for by philosopher and psychologist James Giles, is that Hume is not arguing for a bundle theory, which is a form of reductionism, but rather for an eliminative view of the self. Rather than reducing the self to a bundle of perceptions, Hume rejects the idea of the self altogether. On this interpretation, Hume is proposing a \"no-self theory\" and thus has much in common with Buddhist thought (see \"anatt\u0101\"). Psychologist Alison Gopnik has argued that Hume was in a position to learn about Buddhist thought during his time in France in the 1730s.\nPractical reason.\n\"Practical reason\" relates to whether standards or principles exist that are also authoritative for all rational beings, dictating people's intentions and actions. Hume is mainly considered an anti-rationalist, denying the possibility for practical reason, although other philosophers such as Christine Korsgaard, Jean Hampton, and Elijah Millgram claim that Hume is not so much of an anti-rationalist as he is just a sceptic of practical reason.\nHume denied the existence of practical reason as a principle because he claimed reason does not have any effect on morality, since morality is capable of producing effects in people that reason alone cannot create. As Hume explains in \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1740): Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason of itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.\"Since practical reason is supposed to regulate our actions (in theory), Hume denied practical reason on the grounds that reason cannot directly oppose passions. As Hume puts it, \"Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.\" Reason is less significant than any passion because reason has no original influence, while \"A passion is an original existence, or, if you will, modification of existence.\"\nPractical reason is also concerned with the value of actions rather than the truth of propositions, so Hume believed that reason's shortcoming of affecting morality proved that practical reason could not be authoritative for all rational beings, since morality was essential for dictating people's intentions and actions.\nEthics.\nHume's writings on ethics began in the 1740 \"Treatise\" and were refined in his \"An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals\" (1751). He understood \"feeling\", rather than \"knowing\", as that which governs ethical actions, stating that \"moral decisions are grounded in moral sentiment.\" Arguing that reason cannot be behind morality, he wrote:\nMorals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.\nHume's \"moral sentimentalism\" was shared by his close friend Adam Smith, and the two were mutually influenced by the moral reflections of their older contemporary, Francis Hutcheson. Peter Singer claims that Hume's argument that morals cannot have a rational basis alone \"would have been enough to earn him a place in the history of ethics.\"\nHume also put forward the \"is\u2013ought problem\", later known as \"Hume's Law\", denying the possibility of logically deriving what \"ought\" to be from what \"is\". According to the \"Treatise\" (1740), in every system of morality that Hume has read, the author begins by stating facts about the world as it \"is\" but always ends up suddenly referring to what \"ought\" to be the case. Hume demands that a reason should be given for inferring what \"ought to be\" the case, from \"what is\" the case. This is because it \"seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others.\"\nHume's theory of ethics has been influential in modern-day meta-ethical theory, helping to inspire emotivism, and ethical expressivism and non-cognitivism, as well as Allan Gibbard's general theory of moral judgment and judgments of rationality.\nAesthetics.\nHume's ideas about aesthetics and the theory of art are spread throughout his works, but are particularly connected with his ethical writings, and also the essays \"Of the Standard of Taste\" and \"Of Tragedy\" (1757). His views are rooted in the work of Joseph Addison and Francis Hutcheson. In the \"Treatise\" (1740), he touches on the connection between beauty &amp; deformity and vice &amp; virtue. His later writings on the subject continue to draw parallels of beauty and deformity in art with conduct and character.\nIn \"Standard of Taste\", Hume argues that no rules can be drawn up about what is a tasteful object. However, a reliable critic of taste can be recognised as objective, sensible and unprejudiced, and extensive experience. \"Of Tragedy\" addresses the question of why humans enjoy tragic drama. Hume was concerned with the way spectators find pleasure in the sorrow and anxiety depicted in a tragedy. He argued that this was because the spectator is aware that he is witnessing a dramatic performance. There is pleasure in realising that the terrible events that are being shown are actually fiction. Furthermore, Hume laid down rules for educating people in taste and correct conduct, and his writings in this area have been very influential on English and Anglo-Saxon aesthetics.\nFree will, determinism, and responsibility.\nHume, along with Thomas Hobbes, is cited as a classical compatibilist about the notions of freedom and determinism. \"Compatibilism\" seeks to reconcile human freedom with the mechanist view that human beings are part of a deterministic universe, which is completely governed by physical laws. Hume, on this point, was influenced greatly by the scientific revolution, particularly by Sir Isaac Newton. Hume argued that the dispute between freedom and determinism continued over 2000 years due to ambiguous terminology. He wrote: \"From this circumstance alone, that a controversy has been long kept on foot\u2026we may presume that there is some ambiguity in the expression,\" and that different disputants use different meanings for the same terms.\nHume defines the concept of necessity as \"the uniformity, observable in the operations of nature; where similar objects are constantly conjoined together,\" and liberty as \"a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will.\" He then argues that, according to these definitions, not only are the two compatible, but liberty \"requires\" necessity. For if our actions were not necessitated in the above sense, they would \"have so little in connexion with motives, inclinations and circumstances, that one does not follow with a certain degree of uniformity from the other.\" But if our actions are not thus connected to the will, then our actions can never be free: they would be matters of \"chance; which is universally allowed to have no existence.\" Australian philosopher John Passmore writes that confusion has arisen because \"necessity\" has been taken to mean \"necessary connexion.\" Once this has been abandoned, Hume argues that \"liberty and necessity will be found not to be in conflict one with another.\"\nMoreover, Hume goes on to argue that in order to be held morally responsible, it is required that our behaviour be caused or necessitated, for, as he wrote:\nActions are, by their very nature, temporary and perishing; and where they proceed not from some \"cause\" in the character and disposition of the person who performed them, they can neither redound to his honour, if good; nor infamy, if evil.\nHume describes the link between causality and our capacity to rationally make a decision from this an inference of the mind. Human beings assess a situation based upon certain predetermined events and from that form a choice. Hume believes that this choice is made spontaneously. Hume calls this form of decision making the liberty of spontaneity.\nEducation writer Richard Wright considers that Hume's position rejects a famous moral puzzle attributed to French philosopher Jean Buridan. The Buridan's ass puzzle describes a donkey that is hungry. This donkey has separate bales of hay on both sides, which are of equal distances from him. The problem concerns which bale the donkey chooses. Buridan was said to believe that the donkey would die, because he has no autonomy. The donkey is incapable of forming a rational decision as there is no motive to choose one bale of hay over the other. However, human beings are different, because a human who is placed in a position where he is forced to choose one loaf of bread over another will make a decision to take one in lieu of the other. For Buridan, humans have the capacity of autonomy, and he recognises the choice that is ultimately made will be based on chance, as both loaves of bread are exactly the same. However, Wright says that Hume completely rejects this notion, arguing that a human will spontaneously act in such a situation because he is faced with impending death if he fails to do so. Such a decision is not made on the basis of chance, but rather on necessity and spontaneity, given the prior predetermined events leading up to the predicament.\nHume's argument is supported by modern-day compatibilists such as R. E. Hobart, a pseudonym of philosopher Dickinson S. Miller. However, P. F. Strawson argued that the issue of whether we hold one another morally responsible does not ultimately depend on the truth or falsity of a metaphysical thesis such as determinism. This is because our so holding one another is a non-rational human sentiment that is not predicated on such theses.\nReligion.\nPhilosopher Paul Russell (2005) contends that Hume wrote \"on almost every central question in the philosophy of religion,\" and that these writings \"are among the most important and influential contributions on this topic.\" Touching on the philosophy, psychology, history, and anthropology of religious thought, Hume's 1757 dissertation, \"The Natural History of Religion\", argues that the monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all derive from earlier polytheistic religions. He went on to suggest that all religious belief \"traces, in the end, to dread of the unknown.\" Hume had also written on religious subjects in the first \"Enquiry\", as well as later in the \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\".\nReligious views.\nAlthough he wrote a great deal about religion, Hume's personal views have been the subject of much debate. Some modern critics have described Hume's religious views as agnostic or have described him as a \"Pyrrhonian skeptic.\" Contemporaries considered him to be an atheist, or at least un-Christian, enough so that the Church of Scotland seriously considered bringing charges of infidelity against him. Evidence of his un-Christian beliefs can especially be found in his writings on miracles, in which he attempts to separate historical method from the narrative accounts of miracles. The fact that contemporaries suspected him of atheism is exemplified by a story Hume liked to tell:\nThe best theologian he ever met, he used to say, was the old Edinburgh fishwife who, having recognized him as Hume the atheist, refused to pull him out of the bog into which he had fallen until he declared he was a Christian and repeated the Lord's prayer.\nHowever, in works such as \"Of Superstition and Enthusiasm\", Hume specifically seems to support the standard religious views of his time and place. This still meant that he could be very critical of the Catholic Church, dismissing it with the standard Protestant accusations of superstition and idolatry, as well as dismissing as idolatry what his compatriots saw as uncivilised beliefs. He also considered extreme Protestant sects, the members of which he called \"enthusiasts\", to be corrupters of religion. By contrast, in \"The Natural History of Religion\", Hume presents arguments suggesting that polytheism had much to commend it over monotheism. Additionally, when mentioning religion as a factor in his \"History of England\", Hume uses it to show the deleterious effect it has on human progress. In his \"Treatise on Human Nature\", Hume wrote: \"Generally speaking, the errors in religions are dangerous; those in philosophy only ridiculous.\"\nPaul Russell (2008) writes that Hume was plainly sceptical about religious belief, although perhaps not to the extent of complete atheism. He suggests that Hume's position is best characterised by the term \"irreligion,\" while philosopher David O'Connor (2013) argues that Hume's final position was \"weakly deistic.\" For O'Connor, Hume's \"position is deeply ironic. This is because, while inclining towards a weak form of deism, he seriously doubts that we can ever find a sufficiently favourable balance of evidence to justify accepting any religious position.\" He adds that Hume \"did not believe in the God of standard theism\u2026but he did not rule out all concepts of deity,\" and that \"ambiguity suited his purposes, and this creates difficulty in definitively pinning down his final position on religion.\"\nDesign argument.\nOne of the traditional topics of natural theology is that of the existence of God, and one of the \"a posteriori\" arguments for this is the \"argument from design\" or the teleological argument. The argument is that the existence of God can be proved by the design that is obvious in the complexity of the world, which \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" states is \"the most popular,\" because it is:\u2026the most accessible of the theistic arguments\u2026which identifies evidences of design in nature, inferring from them a divine designer.\u2026 The fact that the universe as a whole is a coherent and efficiently functioning system likewise, in this view, indicates a divine intelligence behind it.In \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\", Hume wrote that the design argument seems to depend upon our experience, and its proponents \"always suppose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and unparalleled.\" Philosopher Louise E. Loeb (2010) notes that Hume is saying that only experience and observation can be our guide to making inferences about the conjunction between events. However, according to Hume: We observe neither God nor other universes, and hence no conjunction involving them. There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God, as unobserved causes.Hume also criticised the argument in his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\" (1779). In this, he suggested that, even if the world is a more or less smoothly functioning system, this may only be a result of the \"chance permutations of particles falling into a temporary or permanent self-sustaining order, which thus has the appearance of design.\"\nA century later, the idea of order without design was rendered more plausible by Charles Darwin's discovery that the adaptations of the forms of life result from the natural selection of inherited characteristics. For philosopher James D. Madden, it is \"Hume, rivaled only by Darwin, [who] has done the most to undermine in principle our confidence in arguments from design among all figures in the Western intellectual tradition.\"\nFinally, Hume discussed a version of the anthropic principle, which is the idea that theories of the universe are constrained by the need to allow for man's existence in it as an observer. Hume has his sceptical mouthpiece Philo suggest that there may have been many worlds, produced by an incompetent designer, whom he called a \"stupid mechanic\". In his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\", Hume wrote:\nMany worlds might have been botched and bungled throughout an eternity, ere this system was struck out: much labour lost: many fruitless trials made: and a slow, but continued improvement carried on during infinite ages in the art of world-making.\nAmerican philosopher Daniel Dennett has suggested that this mechanical explanation of teleology, although \"obviously\u00a0... an amusing philosophical fantasy\", anticipated the notion of natural selection, the 'continued improvement' being like \"any Darwinian selection algorithm.\"\nProblem of miracles.\nIn his discussion of miracles, Hume argues that we should not believe miracles have occurred and that they do not therefore provide us with any reason to think God exists. In \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\" (Section 10), Hume defines a miracle as \"a transgression of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent\". Hume says we believe an event that has frequently occurred is likely to occur again, but we also take into account those instances where the event did not occur:\nA wise man\u2026considers which side is supported by the greater number of experiments.\u2026 A hundred instances or experiments on one side, and fifty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of any event; though a hundred uniform experiments, with only one that is contradictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree of assurance. In all cases, we must balance the opposite experiments\u2026and deduct the smaller number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the superior evidence.\nHume discusses the testimony of those who report miracles. He wrote that testimony might be doubted even from some great authority in case the facts themselves are not credible: \"[T]he evidence, resulting from the testimony, admits of a diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less unusual.\"\nAlthough Hume leaves open the possibility for miracles to occur and be reported, he offers various arguments against this ever having happened in history. He points out that people often lie, and they have good reasons to lie about miracles occurring either because they believe they are doing so for the benefit of their religion or because of the fame that results. Furthermore, people by nature enjoy relating miracles they have heard without caring for their veracity and thus miracles are easily transmitted even when false. Also, Hume notes that miracles seem to occur mostly in \"ignorant and barbarous nations\" and times, and the reason they do not occur in the civilised societies is such societies are not awed by what they know to be natural events. Finally, the miracles of each religion argue against all other religions and their miracles, and so even if a proportion of all reported miracles across the world fit Hume's requirement for belief, the miracles of each religion make the other less likely.\nHume was extremely pleased with his argument against miracles in his \"Enquiry\". He states \"I flatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a like nature, which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check to all kinds of superstitious delusion, and consequently, will be useful as long as the world endures.\" Thus, Hume's argument against miracles had a more abstract basis founded upon the scrutiny, not just primarily of miracles, but of all forms of belief systems. It is a common sense notion of veracity based upon epistemological evidence, and founded on a principle of rationality, proportionality and reasonability.\nThe criterion for assessing Hume's belief system is based on the balance of probability whether something is more likely than not to have occurred. Since the weight of empirical experience contradicts the notion for the existence of miracles, such accounts should be treated with scepticism. Further, the myriad of accounts of miracles contradict one another, as some people who receive miracles will aim to prove the authority of Jesus, whereas others will aim to prove the authority of Muhammad or some other religious prophet or deity. These various differing accounts weaken the overall evidential power of miracles.\nDespite all this, Hume observes that belief in miracles is popular, and that \"the gazing populace\u2026 receive greedily, without examination, whatever soothes superstition, and promotes wonder.\"\nCritics have argued that Hume's position assumes the character of miracles and natural laws prior to any specific examination of miracle claims, thus it amounts to a subtle form of begging the question. To assume that testimony is a homogeneous reference group seems unwise- to compare private miracles with public miracles, unintellectual observers with intellectual observers and those who have little to gain and much to lose with those with much to gain and little to lose is not convincing to many. Indeed, many have argued that miracles not only do not contradict the laws of nature, but require the laws of nature to be intelligible as miraculous, and thus subverting the law of nature. For example, William Adams remarks that \"there must be an ordinary course of nature before anything can be extraordinary. There must be a stream before anything can be interrupted.\" They have also noted that it requires an appeal to inductive inference, as none have observed every part of nature nor examined every possible miracle claim, for instance those in the future. This, in Hume's philosophy, was especially problematic.\nLittle appreciated is the voluminous literature either foreshadowing Hume, in the likes of Thomas Sherlock or directly responding to and engaging with Hume- from William Paley, William Adams, John Douglas, John Leland, and George Campbell, among others. Regarding the latter, it is rumoured that, having read Campbell's Dissertation, Hume remarked that \"the Scotch theologue had beaten him.\"\nHume's main argument concerning miracles is that miracles by definition are singular events that differ from the established laws of nature. Such natural laws are codified as a result of past experiences. Therefore, a miracle is a violation of all prior experience and thus incapable on this basis of reasonable belief. However, the probability that something has occurred in contradiction of all past experience should always be judged to be less than the probability that either ones senses have deceived one, or the person recounting the miraculous occurrence is lying or mistaken. Hume would say, all of which he had past experience of. For Hume, this refusal to grant credence does not guarantee correctness. He offers the example of an Indian Prince, who, having grown up in a hot country, refuses to believe that water has frozen. By Hume's lights, this refusal is not wrong and the Prince \"reasoned justly;\" it is presumably only when he has had extensive experience of the freezing of water that he has warrant to believe that the event could occur.\nSo for Hume, either the miraculous event will become a recurrent event or else it will never be rational to believe it occurred. The connection to religious belief is left unexplained throughout, except for the close of his discussion where Hume notes the reliance of Christianity upon testimony of miraculous occurrences. He makes an ironic remark that anyone who \"is moved by faith to assent\" to revealed testimony \"is conscious of a continued miracle in his own person, which subverts all principles of his understanding, and gives him a determination to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience.\" Hume writes that \"All the testimony whichever was really given for any miracle, or ever will be given, is a subject of derision.\"\nAs a historian of England.\nFrom 1754 to 1762 Hume published \"The History of England\", a six-volume work, that extends (according to its subtitle) \"From the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution in 1688.\" Inspired by Voltaire's sense of the breadth of history, Hume widened the focus of the field away from merely kings, parliaments, and armies, to literature and science as well. He argued that the quest for liberty was the highest standard for judging the past, and concluded that after considerable fluctuation, England at the time of his writing had achieved \"the most entire system of liberty that was ever known amongst mankind\". It \"must be regarded as an event of cultural importance. In its own day, moreover, it was an innovation, soaring high above its very few predecessors.\" Hume's \"History of England\" made him famous as a historian before he was ever considered a serious philosopher. In this work, Hume uses history to tell the story of the rise of England and what led to its greatness and the disastrous effects that religion has had on its progress. For Hume, the history of England's rise may give a template for others who would also like to rise to its current greatness.\nHume's \"The History of England\" was profoundly impacted by his Scottish background. The science of sociology, which is rooted in Scottish thinking of the eighteenth century, had never before been applied to British philosophical history. Because of his Scottish background, Hume was able to bring an outsider's lens to English history that the insulated English whigs lacked.\nHume's coverage of the political upheavals of the 17th century relied in large part on the Earl of Clarendon's \"History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England\" (1646\u201369). Generally, Hume took a moderate royalist position and considered revolution unnecessary to achieve necessary reform. Hume was considered a Tory historian, and emphasised religious differences more than constitutional issues. Laird Okie explains that \"Hume preached the virtues of political moderation, but\u00a0... it was moderation with an anti-Whig, pro-royalist coloring.\" For \"Hume shared the\u00a0... Tory belief that the Stuarts were no more high-handed than their Tudor predecessors\". \"Even though Hume wrote with an anti-Whig animus, it is, paradoxically, correct to regard the \"History\" as an establishment work, one which implicitly endorsed the ruling oligarchy\".\nHistorians have debated whether Hume posited a universal unchanging human nature, or allowed for evolution and development.\nThe debate between Tory and the Whig historians can be seen in the initial reception to Hume's \"History of England\". The whig-dominated world of 1754 overwhelmingly disapproved of Hume's take on English history. In later editions of the book, Hume worked to \"soften or expunge many villainous whig strokes which had crept into it.\"\nHume did not consider himself a pure Tory. Before 1745, he was more akin to an \"independent whig.\" In 1748, he described himself as \"a whig, though a very skeptical one.\" This description of himself as in between whiggism and toryism, helps one understand that his \"History of England\" should be read as his attempt to work out his own philosophy of history.\nRobert Roth argues that Hume's histories display his biases against Presbyterians and Puritans. Roth says his anti-Whig pro-monarchy position diminished the influence of his work, and that his emphasis on politics and religion led to a neglect of social and economic history.\nHume was an early cultural historian of science. His short biographies of leading scientists explored the process of scientific change. He developed new ways of seeing scientists in the context of their times by looking at how they interacted with society and each other. He covers over forty scientists, with special attention paid to Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and Isaac Newton. Hume particularly praised William Harvey, writing about his treatise of the circulation of the blood: \"Harvey is entitled to the glory of having made, by reasoning alone, without any mixture of accident, a capital discovery in one of the most important branches of science.\"\nThe \"History\" became a best-seller and made Hume a wealthy man who no longer had to take up salaried work for others. It was influential for nearly a century, despite competition from imitations by Smollett (1757), Goldsmith (1771) and others. By 1894, there were at least 50 editions as well as abridgements for students, and illustrated pocket editions, probably produced specifically for women.\nPolitical theory.\nHume's writings have been described as largely seminal to conservative theory, and he is considered a founding father of conservatism. Many of his ideas, such as limited government, private property when there is scarcity, and constitutionalism, are first principles of conservative political parties around the world. Thomas Jefferson banned the \"History\" from University of Virginia, feeling that it had \"spread universal toryism over the land.\" By comparison, Samuel Johnson thought Hume to be \"a Tory by chance [...] for he has no principle. If he is anything, he is a Hobbist.\" A major concern of Hume's political philosophy is the importance of the rule of law. He also stresses throughout his political essays the importance of moderation in politics, public spirit, and regard to the community.\nThroughout the period of the American Revolution, Hume had varying views. For instance, in 1768 he encouraged total revolt on the part of the Americans. In 1775, he became certain that a revolution would take place and said that he believed in the American principle and wished the British government would let them be. Hume's influence on some of the Founders can be seen in Benjamin Franklin's suggestion at the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 that no high office in any branch of government should receive a salary, which is a suggestion Hume had made in his emendation of James Harrington's \"Oceana\".\nThe legacy of religious civil war in 18th-century Scotland, combined with the relatively recent memory of the 1715 and 1745 Jacobite risings, had fostered in Hume a distaste for enthusiasm and factionalism. These appeared to him to threaten the fragile and nascent political and social stability of a country that was deeply politically and religiously divided. Hume thought that society is best governed by a general and impartial system of laws; he is less concerned about the form of government that administers these laws, so long as it does so fairly. However, he also clarified that a republic must produce laws, while \"monarchy, when absolute, contains even something repugnant to law.\"\nHume expressed suspicion of attempts to reform society in ways that departed from long-established custom, and he counselled peoples not to resist their governments except in cases of the most egregious tyranny. However, he resisted aligning himself with either of Britain's two political parties, the Whigs and the Tories:\nMy views of \"things\" are more conformable to Whig principles; my representations of \"persons\" to Tory prejudices.\nCanadian philosopher Neil McArthur writes that Hume believed that we should try to balance our demands for liberty with the need for strong authority, without sacrificing either. McArthur characterises Hume as a \"precautionary conservative,\" whose actions would have been \"determined by prudential concerns about the consequences of change, which often demand we ignore our own principles about what is ideal or even legitimate.\" Hume supported the liberty of the press, and was sympathetic to democracy, when suitably constrained. American historian Douglass Adair has argued that Hume was a major inspiration for James Madison's writings, and the essay \"Federalist No. 10\" in particular.\nHume offered his view on the best type of society in an essay titled \"Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth\", which lays out what he thought was the best form of government. He hoped that, \"in some future age, an opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice, either by a dissolution of some old government, or by the combination of men to form a new one, in some distant part of the world\". He defended a strict separation of powers, decentralisation, extending the franchise to anyone who held property of value and limiting the power of the clergy. The system of the Swiss militia was proposed as the best form of protection. Elections were to take place on an annual basis and representatives were to be unpaid. Political philosophers Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, writing of Hume's thoughts about \"the wise statesman\", note that he \"will bear a reverence to what carries the marks of age.\" Also, if he wishes to improve a constitution, his innovations will take account of the \"ancient fabric\", in order not to disturb society.\nIn the political analysis of philosopher George Holland Sabine, the scepticism of Hume extended to the doctrine of government by consent. He notes that \"allegiance is a habit enforced by education and consequently as much a part of human nature as any other motive.\"\nIn the 1770s, Hume was critical of British policies toward the American colonies and advocated for American independence. He wrote in 1771 that \"our union with America\u2026in the nature of things, cannot long subsist.\"\nContributions to economic thought.\nHume expressed his economic views in his \"Political Discourses\", which were incorporated in \"Essays and Treatises\" as Part II of \"Essays, Moral and Political\". To what extent he was influenced by Adam Smith is difficult to stress; however, both of them had similar principles supported from historical events. At the same time Hume did not demonstrate concrete system of economic theory which could be observed in Smith's \"Wealth of Nations\". However, he introduced several new ideas around which the \"classical economics\" of the 18th century was built. Through his discussions on politics, Hume developed many ideas that are prevalent in the field of economics. This includes ideas on private property, inflation, and foreign trade. Referring to his essay \"Of the Balance of Trade\", economist Paul Krugman (2012) has remarked that \"David Hume created what I consider the first true economic model.\"\nIn contrast to Locke, Hume believes that private property is not a natural right. Hume argues it is justified, because resources are limited. Private property would be an unjustified, \"idle ceremonial,\" if all goods were unlimited and available freely. Hume also believed in an unequal distribution of property, because perfect equality would destroy the ideas of thrift and industry. Perfect equality would thus lead to impoverishment.\nDavid Hume anticipated modern monetarism. First, Hume contributed to the theory of quantity and of interest rate. Hume has been credited with being the first to prove that, on an abstract level, there is no quantifiable amount of nominal money that a country needs to thrive. He understood that there was a difference between \"nominal\" and \"real\" money.\nSecond, Hume has a theory of causation which fits in with the Chicago-school \"black box\" approach. According to Hume, cause and effect are related only through correlation. Hume shared the belief with modern monetarists that changes in the supply of money can affect consumption and investment.\nLastly, Hume was a vocal advocate of a stable private sector, though also having some non-monetarist aspects to his economic philosophy. Having a stated preference for rising prices, for instance, Hume considered government debt to be a sort of substitute for actual money, referring to such debt as \"a kind of paper credit.\" He also believed in heavy taxation, believing that it increases effort. Hume's economic approach evidently resembles his other philosophies, in that he does not choose one side indefinitely, but sees gray in the situation\nInfluence.\nDue to Hume's vast influence on contemporary philosophy, a large number of approaches in contemporary philosophy and cognitive science are today called \"Humean.\"\nThe writings of Thomas Reid, a Scottish philosopher and contemporary of Hume, were often critical of Hume's scepticism. Reid formulated his \"common sense\" philosophy, in part, as a reaction against Hume's views.\nHume influenced, and was influenced by, the Christian philosopher Joseph Butler. Hume was impressed by Butler's way of thinking about religion, and Butler may well have been influenced by Hume's writings.\nAttention to Hume's philosophical works grew after the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, in his \"Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics\" (1783), credited Hume with awakening him from his \"dogmatic slumber.\"\nAccording to Arthur Schopenhauer, \"there is more to be learned from each page of David Hume than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart and Schleiermacher taken together.\"\nA. J. Ayer, while introducing his classic exposition of logical positivism in 1936, claimed:The views which are put forward in this treatise derive from\u2026doctrines\u2026which are themselves the logical outcome of the empiricism of Berkeley and David Hume.Albert Einstein, in 1915, wrote that he was inspired by Hume's positivism when formulating his theory of special relativity.\nHume's problem of induction was also of fundamental importance to the philosophy of Karl Popper. In his autobiography, \"Unended Quest\", he wrote: \"Knowledge\u00a0... is \"objective\"; and it is hypothetical or conjectural. This way of looking at the problem made it possible for me to reformulate Hume's \"problem of induction\".\" This insight resulted in Popper's major work \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\". In his \"Conjectures and Refutations\", he wrote:\nI approached the problem of induction through Hume. Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that induction cannot be logically justified.\nHume's rationalism in religious subjects influenced, via German-Scottish theologian Johann Joachim Spalding, the German neology school and rational theology, and contributed to the transformation of German theology in the age of enlightenment. Hume pioneered a comparative history of religion, tried to explain various rites and traditions as being based on deception and challenged various aspects of rational and natural theology, such as the argument from design.\nDanish theologian and philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard adopted \"Hume's suggestion that the role of reason is not to make us wise but to reveal our ignorance,\" though taking it as a reason for the necessity of religious faith, or \"fideism\". The \"fact that Christianity is contrary to reason\u2026is the necessary precondition for true faith.\" Political theorist Isaiah Berlin, who has also pointed out the similarities between the arguments of Hume and Kierkegaard against rational theology, has written about Hume's influence on what Berlin calls the \"counter-Enlightenment\" and on German anti-rationalism. Berlin has also once said of Hume that \"no man has influenced the history of philosophy to a deeper or more disturbing degree.\"\nAccording to philosopher Jerry Fodor, Hume's \"Treatise\" is \"the founding document of cognitive science.\"\nHume engaged with contemporary intellectual luminaries such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, James Boswell, and Adam Smith (who acknowledged Hume's influence on his economics and political philosophy).\nMorris and Brown (2019) write that Hume is \"generally regarded as one of the most important philosophers to write in English.\"\nIn September 2020, the David Hume Tower, a University of Edinburgh building, was renamed to 40 George Square; this was following a campaign led by students of the university to rename it, in objection to Hume's writings related to race."}
{"id": "7927", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7927", "title": "DES (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "7928", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7928", "title": "Dalton Trumbo", "text": "James Dalton Trumbo (December 9, 1905 \u2013 September 10, 1976) was an American screenwriter and novelist who scripted many award-winning films, including \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), \"Exodus\", \"Spartacus\" (both 1960), and \"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo\" (1944). One of the Hollywood Ten, he refused to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) in 1947 during the committee's investigation of Communist influences in the motion picture industry.\nTrumbo, the other members of the Hollywood Ten, and hundreds of other professionals in the industry were blacklisted by Hollywood. He was, however, able to continue working clandestinely on major films, writing under pseudonyms or other authors' names. His uncredited work won two Academy Awards for Best Story: for \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), which was presented to a front writer, and for \"The Brave One\" (1956), which was awarded to a pseudonym used by Trumbo. When he was given public screen credit for both \"Exodus\" and \"Spartacus\" in 1960, it marked the beginning of the end of the Hollywood Blacklist for Trumbo and other affected screenwriters. He finally was given full credit by the Writers' Guild for \"Roman Holiday\" in 2011, nearly 60 years after the fact.\nEarly life.\nTrumbo was born in Montrose, Colorado, the son of Maud (n\u00e9e Tillery) and Orus Bonham Trumbo. His family moved to Grand Junction in 1908. He was proud of his paternal immigrant ancestor, a Protestant of Swiss origin named Jacob Trumbo, who settled in the colony of Virginia in 1736. Trumbo graduated from Grand Junction High School. While still in high school, he worked for Walter Walker as a cub reporter for the \"Grand Junction Daily Sentinel,\" covering courts, the high school, the mortuary and civic organizations. He attended the University of Colorado at Boulder in 1924 and 1925, working as a reporter for the \"Boulder Daily Camera\" and contributing to the campus humor magazine, the yearbook, and the campus newspaper. He was a member of Delta Tau Delta International Fraternity.\nFor nine years after his father died, Trumbo worked the night shift wrapping bread at a Los Angeles bakery, and attended the University of California, Los Angeles (1926) and the University of Southern California (1928\u20131930). During this time, he wrote movie reviews, 88 short stories, and six novels, all of which were rejected for publication.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nTrumbo began his professional writing career in the early 1930s, when several of his articles and stories were published in mainstream magazines, including \"McCall's\", \"Vanity Fair\", the \"Hollywood Spectator\" and \"The Saturday Evening Post\". Trumbo was hired as managing editor of the \"Hollywood Spectator\" in 1934. Later he left the magazine to become a reader in the story department at Warner Bros. studio.\nHis first published novel, \"Eclipse\" (1935), was released during the Great Depression. Writing in the social realist style, Trumbo drew on his years in Grand Junction to portray a town and its people. The book was controversial in his hometown, where many people took issue with his fictional portrayal.\nTrumbo started working in movies in 1937 but continued writing prose. His anti-war novel \"Johnny Got His Gun\" won one of the early National Book Awards: the Most Original Book of 1939. It was inspired by an article Trumbo had read several years earlier: an account of a hospital visit by the Prince of Wales to a Canadian soldier who had lost all his limbs in World War I.\nDuring the late 1930s and early 1940s, Trumbo became one of Hollywood's highest-paid screenwriters, at about $4,000 per week while on assignment, and earning as much as $80,000 in one year. He worked on such films as \"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo\" (1944), \"Our Vines Have Tender Grapes\" (1945), and \"Kitty Foyle\" (1940), for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.\nPolitical advocacy and blacklisting.\nAligned with the Communist Party in the United States before the 1940s, Trumbo was an isolationist. He joined the party in 1943. His novel \"The Remarkable Andrew\" featured the ghost of President Andrew Jackson appearing to caution the United States against getting involved in World War II and in support of the Nazi-Soviet pact. In a review of the book, \"Time\" magazine wise-cracked, \"General Jackson's opinions need surprise no one who has observed George Washington and Abraham Lincoln zealously following the Communist Party Line in recent years.\"\nShortly after the Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Trumbo and his publisher decided to suspend reprinting \"Johnny Got His Gun\" until the end of the war. During the war, Trumbo received letters from individuals \"denouncing Jews\" and using \"Johnny\" to support their arguments for \"an immediate negotiated peace\" with Nazi Germany; Trumbo reported these correspondents to the FBI. Trumbo regretted this decision, which he called \"foolish\". After two FBI agents showed up at his home, he understood that \"their interest lay not in the letters but in me\".\nIn a 1946 article titled \"The Russian Menace\" published in Rob Wagner's \"Script Magazine\", Trumbo wrote from the perspective of a post-World War II Russian citizen. He argued that Russians were likely fearful of the mass of U.S. military power that surrounded them, at a time when any sympathetic view toward Communist countries was viewed with suspicion. He ended the article by stating, \"If I were a Russian ... I would be alarmed, and I would petition my government to take measures at once against what would seem an almost certain blow aimed at my existence. This is how it must appear in Russia today\". He argued that the U.S. was a \"menace\" to Russia, rather than the more popular American view of Russia as the \"red menace\". According to anti-Communist author Kenneth Billingsley, Trumbo had written in \"The Daily Worker\" that Communist influence in Hollywood had prevented films from being made from anti-Communist books, such as Arthur Koestler's \"Darkness at Noon\" and \"The Yogi and the Commissar\".\nWilliam R. Wilkerson, publisher and founder of \"The Hollywood Reporter\", published a July 29, 1946 \"TradeView\" column entitled \"A Vote For Joe Stalin\". It named Trumbo and several others as Communist sympathizers, the first persons identified on what became known as \"Billy's Blacklist\". In October 1947, drawing upon these names, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) summoned Trumbo and nine others to testify for their investigation as to whether Communist agents and sympathizers had surreptitiously planted propaganda in U.S. films. The writers refused to give information about their own or any other person's involvement and were convicted for contempt of Congress. They appealed the conviction to the Supreme Court on First Amendment grounds and lost. Trumbo served eleven months in the federal penitentiary in Ashland, Kentucky in 1950. In the 1976 documentary \"Hollywood On Trial\", Trumbo said: \"As far as I was concerned, it was a completely just verdict. I had contempt for that Congress and have had contempt for it ever since. And on the basis of guilt or innocence, I could never really complain very much. That this was a crime or misdemeanor was the complaint, my complaint.\"\nThe MPAA issued a statement that Trumbo and his compatriots would not be permitted to work in the industry unless they disavowed Communism under oath. After completing his sentence, Trumbo sold his ranch and moved his family to Mexico City with Hugo Butler and his wife Jean Rouverol, who had also been blacklisted. In Mexico, Trumbo wrote 30 scripts (under pseudonyms) for B-movie studios such as King Brothers Productions. In the case of \"Gun Crazy\" (1950), adapted from a short story by MacKinlay Kantor, Kantor agreed to be the front for Trumbo's screenplay. Trumbo's role in the screenplay was not revealed until 1992.\nDuring this blacklist period, Trumbo also wrote \"The Brave One\" (1956) for the King Brothers. Like \"Roman Holiday\", it received an Academy Award for Best Story he could not claim. The script was credited to Robert Rich, a name borrowed from a nephew of the producers. Trumbo recalled earning an average fee of $1,750 per film for 18 screenplays written in two years and said, \"None was very good\".\nHe published \"The Devil in the Book\", an analysis of the conviction of 14 California Smith Act defendants, in 1956. The statute set criminal penalties for advocating the overthrow of the U.S. government and required all non-citizen adult residents to register with the government.\nLater career.\nGradually the blacklist weakened. With the support of director Otto Preminger, Trumbo was credited for the screenplay of the film \"Exodus\" (1960), adapted from the novel of the same name by Leon Uris. Shortly thereafter, actor Kirk Douglas announced Trumbo had written the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's film \"Spartacus\" (also 1960), adapted from the novel by Howard Fast. With these actions, Preminger and Douglas helped end the power of the blacklist. Trumbo was reinstated into the Writers Guild of America, West and was credited on all subsequent scripts. The guild finally gave him full credit for the script of \"Roman Holiday\" in 2011. Trumbo directed the 1971 film adaptation of his novel \"Johnny Got His Gun\", starring Timothy Bottoms, Diane Varsi, Jason Robards and Donald Sutherland. One of the last films Trumbo wrote, \"Executive Action\" (1973), was based on the Kennedy assassination. The Academy officially recognized Trumbo as the winner of the Oscar for \"The Brave One\" in 1975, presenting him with a statuette.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1938, Trumbo married Cleo Fincher, who was born in Fresno on July 17, 1916 and had moved with her divorced mother and her brother and sister to Los Angeles. The Trumbos had three children: Nikola Trumbo (1939), who became a psychotherapist; Christopher Trumbo (1940), a filmmaker and screenwriter who became an expert on the Hollywood blacklist; and Melissa Trumbo (1945), known as Mitzi, a photographer. Mitzi Trumbo dated comedian Steve Martin when they were both in their early 20s, which is recounted in Martin's 2007 book \"Born Standing Up\". Martin wrote of her: \"Mitzi became my official photographer, and she snapped dozens of rolls of film, all to find the perfect publicity photo.\"\nCleo Trumbo died of natural causes at the age of 93 on October 9, 2009 at the home she shared with Mitzi Trumbo in Los Altos, California.\nDeath and legacy.\nTrumbo died in Los Angeles of a heart attack at the age of 70 on September 10, 1976. He donated his body to scientific research.\nIn 1993, Trumbo was posthumously awarded the Academy Award for writing \"Roman Holiday\" (1953). The screen credit and award were previously given to Ian McLellan Hunter, who had been a front for Trumbo. A new statue was made for this award because Hunter's son refused to hand over the one his father had received.\nIn 2003, Christopher Trumbo mounted an Off-Broadway play based on his father's letters called \"Trumbo: Red, White and Blacklisted\", in which a wide variety of actors played his father during the run, including Nathan Lane, Tim Robbins, Brian Dennehy, Ed Harris, Chris Cooper and Gore Vidal. He adapted it as the film \"Trumbo\" (2007), which added documentary footage and new interviews.\nA dramatization of Trumbo's life, also called \"Trumbo\", was released in November 2015. It starred Bryan Cranston as the screenwriter and was directed by Jay Roach. For his portrayal of Trumbo, Cranston was nominated for Best Actor at the 88th Academy Awards.\nThe moving image collection of Trumbo is held at the Academy Film Archive and consists primarily of extensive 35 mm production materials relating to the 1971 anti-war film \"Johnny Got His Gun\". More than a hundred years after his birth, Trumbo was honored by the installation of a statue of him in front of the Avalon Theater on Main Street in Grand Junction, Colorado, his home town. He was depicted writing a screenplay in a bathtub."}
{"id": "7929", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7929", "title": "Differentiability", "text": ""}
{"id": "7930", "revid": "39432156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7930", "title": "Delaware", "text": "Delaware ( ) is a state in the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States, bordering Maryland to its south and west; Pennsylvania to its north; and New Jersey and the Atlantic Ocean to its east. The state takes its name from the nearby Delaware River named after Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr, an English nobleman and Virginia's first colonial governor.\nDelaware occupies the northeastern portion of the Delmarva Peninsula and some islands and territory within the Delaware River. It is the second-smallest and sixth-least populous state, but also the sixth-most densely populated. Delaware's largest city is Wilmington, while the state capital is Dover, the second-largest city in the state. The state is divided into three counties, having the lowest number of any state; from north to south, they are New Castle County, Kent County, and Sussex County. While the southern two counties have historically been predominantly agricultural, New Castle is more urbanized. In a similar vein to Maryland, Delaware's geography, culture, and history combine elements of the Mid-Atlantic, Northeastern, and Southern regions of the country.\nBefore its coastline was explored by Europeans in the 16th century, Delaware was inhabited by several groups of Native Americans, including the Lenape in the north and Nanticoke in the south. It was initially colonized by Dutch traders at Zwaanendael, near the present town of Lewes, in 1631. Delaware was one of the 13 colonies participating in the American Revolution. On December 7, 1787, Delaware became the first state to ratify the Constitution of the United States, and has since been known as \"The First State\". Since the turn of the 20th century, Delaware is also a \"de facto\" onshore corporate haven, in which by virtue of its corporate laws, the state is the domicile of over 50% of all NYSE-listed business and 60% of the \"Fortune\" 500.\nToponymy.\nThe state was named after the Delaware River, which in turn derived its name from Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr (1577\u20131618) who was the ruling governor of the Colony of Virginia at the time Europeans first explored the river. The Delaware people, a name used by Europeans for Lenape people indigenous to the Delaware Valley, also derive their name from the same source.\nThe surname \"de La Warr\" comes from Sussex and is of Anglo-Norman origin. It came probably from a Norman lieu-dit \"La Guerre\". This toponymic could derive from Latin \"ager\", from the Breton \"gwern\" or from the Late Latin \"varectum\" (fallow). The toponyms Gara, Gare, Gaire (the sound [\u00e4] often mutated in [\u00e6]) also appear in old texts cited by Lucien Musset, where the word \"ga(i)ra\" means gore. It could also be linked with a patronymic from the Old Norse \"verr\".\nGeography.\nDelaware is long and ranges from to across, totaling , making it the second-smallest state in the United States after Rhode Island. Delaware is bounded to the north by Pennsylvania; to the east by the Delaware River, Delaware Bay, New Jersey and the Atlantic Ocean; and to the west and south by Maryland. Small portions of Delaware are also situated on the eastern side of the Delaware River sharing land boundaries with New Jersey. The state of Delaware, together with the Eastern Shore counties of Maryland and two counties of Virginia, form the Delmarva Peninsula, which stretches down the Mid-Atlantic Coast.\nThe definition of the northern boundary of the state is unusual. Most of the boundary between Delaware and Pennsylvania was originally defined by an arc extending from the cupola of the courthouse in the city of New Castle. This boundary is often referred to as the Twelve-Mile Circle. Although the Twelve-Mile Circle is often claimed to be the only territorial boundary in the U.S. that is a true arc, the Mexican boundary with Texas includes several arcs, and many cities in the South (such as Plains, Georgia) also have circular boundaries.\nThis border extends all the way east to the low-tide mark on the New Jersey shore, then continues south along the shoreline until it again reaches the arc in the south; then the boundary continues in a more conventional way in the middle of the main channel (thalweg) of the Delaware River. To the west, a portion of the arc extends past the easternmost edge of Maryland. The remaining western border runs slightly east of due south from its intersection with the arc. The Wedge of land between the northwest part of the arc and the Maryland border was claimed by both Delaware and Pennsylvania until 1921, when Delaware's claim was confirmed.\nTopography.\nDelaware is on a level plain, with the lowest mean elevation of any state in the nation. Its highest elevation, located at Ebright Azimuth, near Concord High School, is less than above sea level. The northernmost part of the state is part of the Piedmont Plateau with hills and rolling surfaces. The Atlantic Seaboard fall line approximately follows the Robert Kirkwood Highway between Newark and Wilmington; south of this road is the Atlantic Coastal Plain with flat, sandy, and, in some parts, swampy ground. A ridge about high extends along the western boundary of the state and separates the watersheds that feed Delaware River and Bay to the east and the Chesapeake Bay to the west.\nClimate.\nSince almost all of Delaware is a part of the Atlantic coastal plain, the effects of the ocean moderate its climate. The state lies in the humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") zone. Despite its small size (roughly from its northernmost to southernmost points), there is significant variation in mean temperature and amount of snowfall between Sussex County and New Castle County. Moderated by the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware Bay, the southern portion of the state has a milder climate and a longer growing season than the northern portion of the state. Delaware's all-time record high of was recorded at Millsboro on July 21, 1930. The all-time record low of was also recorded at Millsboro, on January 17, 1893. The hardiness zones are 7a and 7b.\nEnvironment.\nThe transitional climate of Delaware supports a wide variety of vegetation. In the northern third of the state are found Northeastern coastal forests and mixed oak forests typical of the northeastern United States. In the southern two-thirds of the state are found Middle Atlantic coastal forests. Trap Pond State Park, along with areas in other parts of Sussex County, for example, support the northernmost stands of bald cypress trees in North America.\nEnvironmental management.\nDelaware provides government subsidy support for the clean-up of property \"lightly contaminated\" by hazardous waste, the proceeds for which come from a tax on wholesale petroleum sales.\nHistory.\nNative Americans.\nBefore Delaware was settled by European colonists, the area was home to the Eastern Algonquian tribes known as the Unami Lenape, or Delaware, who lived mostly along the coast, and the Nanticoke who occupied much of the southern Delmarva Peninsula. John Smith also shows two Iroquoian tribes, the Kuskarawock and Tockwogh, living north of the Nanticoke\u2014they may have held small portions of land in the western part of the state before migrating across the Chesapeake Bay. The Kuskarawocks were most likely the Tuscarora.\nThe Unami Lenape in the Delaware Valley were closely related to Munsee Lenape tribes along the Hudson River. They had a settled hunting and agricultural society, and they rapidly became middlemen in an increasingly frantic fur trade with their ancient enemy, the Minqua or Susquehannock. With the loss of their lands on the Delaware River and the destruction of the Minqua by the Iroquois of the Five Nations in the 1670s, the remnants of the Lenape who wished to remain identified as such left the region and moved over the Alleghany Mountains by the mid-18th century. Generally, those who did not relocate out of the state of Delaware were baptized, became Christian and were grouped together with other persons of color in official records and in the minds of their non-Native American neighbors.\nColonial Delaware.\nThe Dutch were the first Europeans to settle in present-day Delaware in the middle region by establishing a trading post at Zwaanendael, near the site of Lewes in 1631. Within a year all the settlers were killed in a dispute with area Native American tribes. In 1638 New Sweden, a Swedish trading post and colony, was established at Fort Christina (now in Wilmington) by Peter Minuit at the head of a group of Swedes, Finns and Dutch. The colony of New Sweden lasted 17 years. In 1651 the Dutch, reinvigorated by the leadership of Peter Stuyvesant, established a fort at present-day New Castle, and in 1655 they conquered the New Sweden colony, annexing it into the Dutch New Netherland. Only nine years later, in 1664, the Dutch were conquered by a fleet of English ships by Sir Robert Carr under the direction of James, the Duke of York. Fighting off a prior claim by Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore, Proprietor of Maryland, the Duke passed his somewhat dubious ownership on to William Penn in 1682. Penn strongly desired access to the sea for his Pennsylvania province and leased what then came to be known as the \"Lower Counties on the Delaware\" from the Duke.\nPenn established representative government and briefly combined his two possessions under one General Assembly in 1682. However, by 1704 the Province of Pennsylvania had grown so large their representatives wanted to make decisions without the assent of the Lower Counties, and the two groups of representatives began meeting on their own, one at Philadelphia, and the other at New Castle. Penn and his heirs remained proprietors of both and always appointed the same person Governor for their Province of Pennsylvania and their territory of the Lower Counties. The fact that Delaware and Pennsylvania shared the same governor was not unique. From 1703 to 1738 New York and New Jersey shared a governor. Massachusetts and New Hampshire also shared a governor for some time.\nDependent in early years on indentured labor, Delaware imported more slaves as the number of English immigrants decreased with better economic conditions in England. The colony became a slave society and cultivated tobacco as a cash crop, although English immigrants continued to arrive.\nAmerican Revolution.\nLike the other middle colonies, the Lower Counties on the Delaware initially showed little enthusiasm for a break with Britain. The citizenry had a good relationship with the Proprietary government, and generally were allowed more independence of action in their Colonial Assembly than in other colonies. Merchants at the port of Wilmington had trading ties with the British.\nSo it was that New Castle lawyer Thomas McKean denounced the Stamp Act in the strongest terms, and Kent County native John Dickinson became the \"Penman of the Revolution.\" Anticipating the Declaration of Independence, Patriot leaders Thomas McKean and Caesar Rodney convinced the Colonial Assembly to declare itself separated from British and Pennsylvania rule on June 15, 1776. The person best representing Delaware's majority, George Read, could not bring himself to vote for a Declaration of Independence. Only the dramatic overnight ride of Caesar Rodney gave the delegation the votes needed to cast Delaware's vote for independence.\nInitially led by John Haslet, Delaware provided one of the premier regiments in the Continental Army, known as the \"Delaware Blues\" and nicknamed the \"Blue Hen's Chicks\". In August 1777 General Sir William Howe led a British army through Delaware on his way to a victory at the Battle of Brandywine and capture of the city of Philadelphia. The only real engagement on Delaware soil was the Battle of Cooch's Bridge, fought on September 3, 1777, at Cooch's Bridge in New Castle County, although there was a minor Loyalist rebellion in 1778.\nFollowing the Battle of Brandywine, Wilmington was occupied by the British, and State President John McKinly was taken prisoner. The British remained in control of the Delaware River for much of the rest of the war, disrupting commerce and providing encouragement to an active Loyalist portion of the population, particularly in Sussex County. Because the British promised slaves of rebels freedom for fighting with them, escaped slaves flocked north to join their lines.\nFollowing the American Revolution, statesmen from Delaware were among the leading proponents of a strong central United States with equal representation for each state.\nSlavery and race.\nMany colonial settlers came to Delaware from Maryland and Virginia, where the population had been increasing rapidly. The economies of these colonies were chiefly based on labor-intensive tobacco and increasingly dependent on African slaves because of a decline in working class immigrants from England. Most of the English colonists had arrived as indentured servants (contracted for a fixed period to pay for their passage), and in the early years the line between servant and slave was fluid.\nMost of the free African-American families in Delaware before the Revolution had migrated from Maryland to find more affordable land. They were descendants chiefly of relationships or marriages between white servant women and enslaved, servant or free African or African-American men. Under slavery law, children took the social status of their mothers, so children born to white women were free, regardless of their paternity, just as children born to enslaved women were born into slavery. As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in England, more slaves were imported for labor and the caste lines hardened.\nBy the end of the colonial period, the number of enslaved people in Delaware began to decline. Shifts in the agriculture economy from tobacco to mixed farming resulted in less need for slaves' labor. In addition local Methodists and Quakers encouraged slaveholders to free their slaves following the American Revolution, and many did so in a surge of individual manumissions for idealistic reasons. By 1810 three-quarters of all blacks in Delaware were free. When John Dickinson freed his slaves in 1777, he was Delaware's largest slave owner with 37 slaves. By 1860, the largest slaveholder owned 16 slaves.\nAlthough attempts to abolish slavery failed by narrow margins in the legislature, in practical terms the state had mostly ended the practice. By the 1860 census on the verge of the Civil War, 91.7% of the black population were free; 1,798 were slaves, as compared to 19,829 \"free colored persons\".\nAn independent black denomination was chartered in 1813 by freed slave Peter Spencer as the \"Union Church of Africans\". This followed the 1793 establishment in Philadelphia of the African Methodist Episcopal Church by Richard Allen, which had ties to the Methodist Episcopal Church until 1816. Spencer built a church in Wilmington for the new denomination. This was renamed as the African Union First Colored Methodist Protestant Church and Connection, more commonly known as the A.U.M.P. Church. In 1814, Spencer called for the first annual gathering, known as the Big August Quarterly, which continues to draw members of this denomination and their descendants together in a religious and cultural festival.\nDelaware voted against secession on January 3, 1861, and so remained in the Union. While most Delaware citizens who fought in the war served in the regiments of the state, some served in companies on the Confederate side in Maryland and Virginia Regiments. Delaware is notable for being the only slave state from which no Confederate regiments or militia groups were assembled. Delaware essentially freed the few slaves who were still in bondage shortly after the Civil War but rejected the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments to the Constitution; the 13th Amendment was rejected on February 8, 1865, the 14th Amendment was rejected on February 8, 1867, and the 15th Amendment was rejected on March 18, 1869. Delaware officially ratified the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments on February 12, 1901.\nReconstruction and Industrialization.\nAfter the Civil War, Democratic governments led by the state's Bourbon aristocracy continued to dominate the state and imposed an explicitly white supremacist regime in the state. The Democratic legislatures declared blacks second-class citizens in 1866 and restricted their voting rights despite the Fifteenth Amendment, ensuring continued Democratic success throughout most of the nineteenth century.\nBeginning in the late nineteenth century, the Wilmington area grew into a manufacturing center. Investment in manufacturing in the city grew from $5.5 million in 1860 to $44 million in 1900. The most notable manufacturer in the state was the Du Pont Company. Because of Wilmington's growth, local politicians from the city and New Castle County pressured the state government to adopt a new constitution providing the north with more representation. However, the subsequent 1897 constitution did not proportionally represent the north and continued to give the southern counties disproportionate influence. \nAs manufacturing expanded, businesses became major players in state affairs and funders of politicians through families such as the Du Ponts. Republican John Addicks attempted to buy a US Senate seat multiple times in a rivalry with the Du Ponts until the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment. The allegiance of industries with the Republican party allowed them to gain control of the state's governorship throughout most of the twentieth century. The GOP ensured blacks could vote because of their general support for Republicans and thus undid restrictions on black suffrage.\nDelaware benefited greatly from World War I because of the state's large gunpowder industry. The Du Pont Company, the most dominant business in the state by WWI, produced an estimated 40% of all gunpowder used by the Allies during the war. It produced nylon in the state after the war and began investments into General Motors. Additionally, the company invested heavily in the expansion of public schools in the state and colleges such as the University of Delaware in the 1910s and 1920s. This included primary and secondary schools for blacks and women. Delaware suffered less during the Great Depression than other states, but the depression spurred further migration from the rural south to urban areas.\nWorld War II to present.\nLike in World War I, the state enjoyed a big stimulus to its gunpowder and shipyard industries in World War II. New job opportunities during and after the war in the Wilmington area coaxed African Americans from the southern counties to move to the city. The proportion of blacks constituting the city's population rose from 15% in 1950 to over 50% by 1980. The surge of black migrants to the north sparked white flight in which middle class whites moved from the city to suburban areas, leading to general segregation of Delaware's society. In the 1940s and 1950s, the state attempted to integrate its schools. The University of Delaware admitted its first black student in 1948, and local courts ruled that primary schools had to be integrated. Delaware's integration efforts partially inspired the US Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education.\nHowever, integration only encouraged more white flight, and poor economic conditions for the black population led to some violence during the 1960s. Riots broke out in Wilmington in 1967 and again in 1968 in response to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr after which the National Guard occupied the city for nine months to prevent further violence.\nSince WWII, the state has been generally economically prosperous and enjoyed relatively high per capita income because of its location between major cities like Philadelphia, New York, and Washington, DC. Its population grew rapidly, particularly in the suburbs in the north where New Castle county became an extension of the Philadelphia metropolitan area. Americans, including migrants from Puerto Rico, and immigrants from Latin America flocked to the state. By 1990, only 50% of Delaware's population consisted of natives to the state.\nDemographics.\nThe United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Delaware was 973,764 on July 1, 2019, an 8.4% increase since the 2010 United States Census.\nDelaware's history as a border state has led it to exhibit characteristics of both the Northern and the Southern regions of the United States. Generally, the rural Southern (or \"Slower Lower\") regions of Delaware below the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal embody a Southern culture, while densely-populated Northern Delaware above the canal\u2014particularly Wilmington, a part of the Philadelphia metropolitan area\u2014has more in common with that of the Northeast. The U.S. Census Bureau designates Delaware as one of the South Atlantic States, but it is commonly associated with the Mid-Atlantic States and/or Northeastern United States by other federal agencies, the media, and some residents.\nAncestry.\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census, Delaware had a population of 897,934. The racial composition of the state was:\nEthnically, Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 8.2% of the population.\nDelaware is the sixth most densely populated state, with a population density of 442.6 people per square mile, 356.4 per square mile more than the national average, and ranking 45th in population. Delaware is one of five states (Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, Wyoming) that do not have a single city with a population over 100,000 as of the 2010 census. The center of population of Delaware is in New Castle County, in the town of Townsend.\n, 49.7% of Delaware's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry). In 2000 approximately 19% of the population were African-American and 5% of the population is Hispanic (mostly of Puerto Rican or Mexican ancestry).\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not add up because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nLanguages.\nAs of 2000, 91% of Delaware residents of age5 and older spoke only English at home; 5% spoke Spanish. French was the third-most spoken language at 0.7%, followed by Chinese at 0.5% and German at 0.5%.\nLegislation had been proposed in both the House and the Senate in Delaware to designate English as the official language. Neither bill was passed in the legislature.\nReligion.\n, Delaware is mostly Christian. Although Protestants account for almost half of the population, the Catholic Church is the largest single denomination in the state. The Association of Religion Data Archives reported in 2010 that the three largest denominational groups in Delaware by number of adherents are the Catholic Church at 182,532 adherents, the United Methodist Church with 53,656 members reported, and non-denominational Evangelical Protestant with 22,973 adherents reported. The religious body with the largest number of congregations is the United Methodist Church (with 158 congregations) followed by non-denominational Evangelical Protestant (with 106 congregations), then the Catholic Church (with 45 congregations).\nThe Roman Catholic Diocese of Wilmington and the Episcopal Diocese of Delaware oversee the parishes within their denominations. The A.U.M.P. Church, the oldest African-American denomination in the nation, was founded in Wilmington. It still has a substantial presence in the state. Reflecting new immigrant populations, an Islamic mosque has been built in the Ogletown area, and a Hindu temple in Hockessin.\nDelaware is home to an Amish community which resides west of Dover in Kent County, consisting of nine church districts and about 1,650 people. The Amish first settled in Kent County in 1915. In recent years, increasing development has led to the decline in the number of Amish living in the community.\nA 2012 survey of religious attitudes in the United States found that 34% of Delaware residents considered themselves \"moderately religious\", 33% \"very religious\", and 33% as \"non-religious\".\nSexual orientation.\nA 2012 Gallup poll found that Delaware's proportion of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender adults stood at 3.4 percent of the population. This constitutes a total LGBT adult population estimate of 23,698 people. The number of same-sex couple households in 2010 stood at 2,646. This grew by 41.65% from a decade earlier. On July 1, 2013, same-sex marriage was legalized, and all civil unions would be converted into marriages.\nEconomy.\nAffluence.\nAccording to a 2020 study by Kiplinger, Delaware had the seventeenth largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.98 percent, 0.7 percent from 2013 in ration but falling eight places in ranking. Delaware had 25,937 millionaires as of 2020. The median income for all Delaware households as of 2020 was $64,805. \nAgriculture.\nDelaware's agricultural output consists of poultry, nursery stock, soybeans, dairy products and corn.\nIndustries.\n, the state's unemployment rate was 3.7%.\nThe state's largest employers are:\nIndustrial decline.\nSince the mid-2000s, Delaware has seen the departure of the state's automotive manufacturing industry (General Motors Wilmington Assembly and Chrysler Newark Assembly), the corporate buyout of a major bank holding company (MBNA), the departure of the state's steel industry (Evraz Claymont Steel), the bankruptcy of a fiber mill (National Vulcanized Fibre), and the diminishing presence of AstraZeneca in Wilmington.\nIn late 2015, DuPont announced that 1,700 employees, nearly a third of its footprint in Delaware, would be laid off in early 2016. The merger of E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co. and Dow Chemical Company into DowDuPont took place on September 1, 2017.\nIncorporation in Delaware.\nMore than half of all U.S. publicly traded companies, and 63% of the Fortune 500, are incorporated in Delaware. The state's attractiveness as a corporate haven is largely because of its business-friendly corporation law. Franchise taxes on Delaware corporations supply about a fifth of the state's revenue. Although \"USA (Delaware)\" ranked as the world's most opaque jurisdiction on the Tax Justice Network's 2009 Financial Secrecy Index, the same group's 2011 Index ranks the U.S. fifth and does not specify Delaware. In Delaware, there are more than a million registered corporations, meaning there are more corporations than people.\nFood and drink.\n stipulates that alcoholic liquor be sold only in specifically licensed establishments, and only between 9:00a.m. and 1:00a.m. Until 2003, Delaware was among the several states enforcing blue laws and banned the sale of liquor on Sunday.\nTransportation.\nThe transportation system in Delaware is under the governance and supervision of the Delaware Department of Transportation, also known as \"DelDOT\". Funding for DelDOT projects is drawn, in part, from the Delaware Transportation Trust Fund, established in 1987 to help stabilize transportation funding; the availability of the Trust led to a gradual separation of DelDOT operations from other Delaware state operations. DelDOT manages programs such as a Delaware Adopt-a-Highway program, major road route snow removal, traffic control infrastructure (signs and signals), toll road management, Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles, the Delaware Transit Corporation (branded as \"DART First State\", the state government public transportation organization), among others. In 2009, DelDOT maintained 13,507 lane-miles, totaling 89 percent of the state's public roadway system, the rest being under the supervision of individual municipalities. This far exceeds the national average (20 percent) for state department of transportation maintenance responsibility.\nRoads.\nOne major branch of the U.S. Interstate Highway System, Interstate95 (I-95), crosses Delaware southwest-to-northeast across New Castle County. In addition to I-95, there are six U.S. highways that serve Delaware: U.S.9, U.S.13, U.S.40, U.S.113, U.S.202, and U.S.301. There are also several state highways that cross the state of Delaware; a few of them include DE1, DE9, and DE404. U.S.13 and DE1 are primary north\u2013south highways connecting Wilmington and Pennsylvania with Maryland, with DE1 serving as the main route between Wilmington and the Delaware beaches. DE9 is a north\u2013south highway connecting Dover and Wilmington via a scenic route along the Delaware Bay. U.S.40 is a primary east\u2013west route, connecting Maryland with New Jersey. DE404 is another primary east\u2013west highway connecting the Chesapeake Bay Bridge in Maryland with the Delaware beaches. The state also operates three toll highways, the Delaware Turnpike, which is I-95, between Maryland and New Castle; the Korean War Veterans Memorial Highway, which is DE1, between Wilmington and Dover; and the U.S. 301 toll road between the Maryland border and DE1 in New Castle County.\nA bicycle route, Delaware Bicycle Route\u00a01, spans the north\u2013south length of the state from the Maryland border in Fenwick Island to the Pennsylvania border north of Montchanin. It is the first of several signed bike routes planned in Delaware.\nDelaware has about 1,450 bridges, 95 percent of which are under the supervision of DelDOT. About 30 percent of all Delaware bridges were built before 1950, and about 60 percent of the number are included in the National Bridge Inventory. Some bridges not under DelDOT supervision includes the four bridges on the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal, which are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Delaware Memorial Bridge, which is under the bi-state Delaware River and Bay Authority.\nIt has been noted that the tar and chip composition of secondary roads in Sussex County makes them more prone to deterioration than are the asphalt roadways in almost the rest of the state. Among these roads, Sussex (county road) 236 is among the most problematic.\nFerries.\nThree ferries operate in the state of Delaware:\nRail and bus.\nAmtrak has two stations in Delaware along the Northeast Corridor; the relatively quiet Newark Rail Station in Newark, and the busier Wilmington Rail Station in Wilmington. The Northeast Corridor is also served by SEPTA's Wilmington/Newark Line of Regional Rail, which serves Claymont, Wilmington, Churchmans Crossing, and Newark.\nTwo Class I railroads, Norfolk Southern and CSX, provide freight rail service in northern New Castle County. Norfolk Southern provides freight service along the Northeast Corridor and to industrial areas in Edgemoor, New Castle, and Delaware City. CSX's Philadelphia Subdivision passes through northern New Castle County parallel to the Amtrak Northeast Corridor. Multiple short-line railroads provide freight service in Delaware. The Delmarva Central Railroad operates the most trackage of the short-line railroads, running from an interchange with Norfolk Southern in Porter south through Dover, Harrington, and Seaford to Delmar, with another line running from Harrington to Frankford and branches from Ellendale to Milton and from Georgetown to Gravel Hill. The Delmarva Central Railroad connects with the Maryland and Delaware Railroad, which serves local customers in Sussex County. CSX connects with the freight/heritage operation, the Wilmington and Western Railroad, based in Wilmington and the East Penn Railroad, which operates a line from Wilmington to Coatesville, Pennsylvania.\nThe last north\u2013south passenger trains through the main part of Delaware was the Pennsylvania Railroad's local Wilmington-Delmar train in 1965. This was a successor to the \"Del-Mar-Va Express\" and \"Cavalier\", which had run from Philadelphia through the state's interior, to the end of the Delmarva Peninsula until the mid-1950s.\nThe DART First State public transportation system was named \"Most Outstanding Public Transportation System\" in 2003 by the American Public Transportation Association. Coverage of the system is broad within northern New Castle County with close association to major highways in Kent and Sussex counties. The system includes bus, subsidized passenger rail operated by Philadelphia transit agency SEPTA, and subsidized taxi and paratransit modes. The paratransit system, consisting of a statewide door-to-door bus service for the elderly and disabled, has been described by a Delaware state report as \"the most generous paratransit system in the United States\". , fees for the paratransit service have not changed since 1988.\nAir.\n, there is no scheduled air service from any Delaware airport, as has been the case in various years since 1991. Various airlines had served Wilmington Airport, the latest departure being Frontier Airlines in April 2015.\nDelaware is centrally situated in the Northeast megalopolis region of cities along I-95. Therefore, Delaware commercial airline passengers most frequently use Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport (BWI) and Washington Dulles International Airport (IAD) for domestic and international transit. Residents of Sussex County will also use Wicomico Regional Airport (SBY), as it is located less than from the Delaware border. Atlantic City International Airport (ACY), Newark Liberty International Airport (EWR), and Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport (DCA) are also within a radius of New Castle County.\nOther general aviation airports in Delaware include Summit Airport near Middletown, Delaware Airpark near Cheswold, and Delaware Coastal Airport near Georgetown.\nDover Air Force Base, one of the largest in the country, is home to the 436th Airlift Wing and the 512th Airlift Wing. In addition to its other responsibilities in the Air Mobility Command, it serves as the entry point and mortuary for U.S. military personnel (and some civilians) who die overseas.\nLaw and government.\nDelaware's fourth and current constitution, adopted in 1897, provides for executive, judicial and legislative branches.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Delaware General Assembly consists of a House of Representatives with 41 members and a Senate with 21 members. It sits in Dover, the state capital. Representatives are elected to two-year terms, while senators are elected to four-year terms. The Senate confirms judicial and other nominees appointed by the governor.\nDelaware's U.S. Senators are Tom Carper (Democrat) and Chris Coons (Democrat). Delaware's single U.S. Representative is Lisa Blunt Rochester (Democrat).\nJudicial branch.\nThe Delaware Constitution establishes a number of courts:\nMinor non-constitutional courts include the Justice of the Peace Courts and Aldermen's Courts.\nSignificantly, Delaware has one of the few remaining Courts of Chancery in the nation, which has jurisdiction over equity cases, the vast majority of which are corporate disputes, many relating to mergers and acquisitions. The Court of Chancery and the Delaware Supreme Court have developed a worldwide reputation for rendering concise opinions concerning corporate law which generally (but not always) grant broad discretion to corporate boards of directors and officers. In addition, the Delaware General Corporation Law, which forms the basis of the Courts' opinions, is widely regarded as giving great flexibility to corporations to manage their affairs. For these reasons, Delaware is considered to have the most business-friendly legal system in the United States; therefore a great number of companies are incorporated in Delaware, including 60% of the companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange.\nDelaware was the last U.S. state to use judicial corporal punishment, in 1952.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch is headed by the Governor of Delaware. The present governor is John Carney (Democrat), who took office January 17, 2017. The lieutenant governor is Bethany Hall-Long. The governor presents a \"State of the State\" speech to a joint session of the Delaware legislature annually.\nCounties.\nDelaware is subdivided into three counties; from north to south they are New Castle, Kent and Sussex. This is the fewest among all states. Each county elects its own legislative body (known in New Castle and Sussex counties as County Council, and in Kent County as Levy Court), which deal primarily in zoning and development issues. Most functions which are handled on a county-by-county basis in other states\u2014such as court and law enforcement\u2014have been centralized in Delaware, leading to a significant concentration of power in the Delaware state government. The counties were historically divided into hundreds, which were used as tax reporting and voting districts until the 1960s, but now serve no administrative role, their only current official legal use being in real estate title descriptions.\nPolitics.\nThe Democratic Party holds a plurality of registrations in Delaware. Until the 2000 presidential election, the state tended to be a Presidential bellwether, sending its three electoral votes to the winning candidate since 1952. This trend ended in 2000 when Delaware's electoral votes went to Al Gore by 13 percentage points. In 2004, John Kerry won Delaware by eight percentage points. In 2008, Democrat Barack Obama defeated Republican John McCain in Delaware by 25 percentage points. Obama's running mate was Joe Biden, who had represented Delaware in the United States Senate since 1973 and was later inaugurated President of the United States in 2021. Obama carried Delaware by 19 percentage points in 2012. In 2016, Delaware's electoral votes went to Hillary Clinton by 11 percentage points. In 2020, Democratic nominee, former vice president and Delaware resident Joe Biden beat incumbent President Donald Trump in the state by over 19 percentage points. Currently, Democrats hold all positions of authority in Delaware including Senate and House.\nDelaware's swing to the Democrats is in part due to a strong Democratic trend in New Castle County, home to 55 percent of Delaware's population (the two smaller counties have only 359,000 people between them to New Castle County's 535,000). New Castle County has not voted Republican in a presidential election since 1988. In 1992, 2000, 2004, and 2016, the Republican presidential candidate carried both Kent and Sussex but lost by double digits each time in New Castle County, which was a large enough margin to swing the state to the Democrats. New Castle County also elects a substantial majority of the legislature; 27 of the 41 state house districts and 14 of the 21 state senate districts are based in New Castle County.\nThe Democrats have held the governorship since 1993, having won the last seven gubernatorial elections in a row. Democrats presently hold all the nine statewide elected offices, while the Republicans last won two statewide offices in 2014, State Auditor and State Treasurer.\nFreedom of information.\nEach of the 50 states of the United States has passed some form of freedom of information legislation, which provides a mechanism for the general public to request information of the government. In 2011 Delaware passed legislation placing a 15 business day time limit on addressing freedom-of-information requests, to either produce information or an explanation of why such information would take longer than this time to produce.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected by the Delaware Division of Revenue.\nDelaware has six different income tax brackets, ranging from 2.2% to 5.95%. The state does not assess sales tax on consumers. The state does, however, impose a tax on the gross receipts of most businesses. Business and occupational license tax rates range from 0.096% to 1.92%, depending on the category of business activity.\nDelaware does not assess a state-level tax on real or personal property. Real estate is subject to county property taxes, school district property taxes, vocational school district taxes, and, if located within an incorporated area, municipal property taxes.\nGambling provides significant revenue to the state. For instance, the casino at Delaware Park Racetrack provided more than $100million to the state in 2010.\nIn June 2018, Delaware became the first U.S. state to legalize sports betting following the Supreme Court ruling to repeal The Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA).\nMunicipalities.\nWilmington is the state's most populous city (70,635) and its economic hub. It is located within commuting distance of both Philadelphia and Baltimore. Dover is the state capital and the second most populous city (38,079).\nUnincorporated places.\nThe table below lists the ten largest municipalities in the state based on the 2018 United States Census Estimate.\nEducation.\nIn the early 1920s, Pierre S. du Pont served as president of the state board of education. At the time, state law prohibited money raised from white taxpayers from being used to support the state's schools for black children. Appalled by the condition of the black schools, du Pont donated four million dollars to construct 86 new school buildings.\nDelaware was the origin of \"Belton v. Gebhart\" (1952), one of the four cases which were combined into \"Brown v. Board of Education\", the Supreme Court of the United States decision that led to the end of officially segregated public schools. Significantly, \"Belton\" was the only case in which the state court found for the plaintiffs, thereby ruling that segregation is unconstitutional.\nUnlike many states, Delaware's educational system is centralized in a state Superintendent of Education, with local school boards retaining control over taxation and some curriculum decisions. This centralized system, combined with the small size of the state, likely contributed to Delaware becoming the first state, after completion of a three-year, $30million program ending in 1999, to wire every K-12 classroom in the state to the Internet.\n, the Delaware Department of Education had authorized the founding of 25 charter schools in the state, one of them being all-girls.\nAll teachers in the State's public school districts are unionized. , none of the State's charter schools are members of a teachers union. One of the State's teachers' unions is Delaware State Education Association (DSEA), whose President is Frederika Jenner.\nSister state.\nDelaware's sister state in Japan is Miyagi Prefecture.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nTwo daily newspapers are based in Delaware, the \"Delaware State News\", based in Dover and covering the two southern counties, and \"The News Journal\" covering Wilmington and northern Delaware. The state is also served by several weekly, monthly and online publications.\nTelevision.\nNo standalone television stations are based solely in Delaware. The northern part of the state is served by network stations in Philadelphia and the southern part by network stations in Salisbury, Maryland. Philadelphia's ABC affiliate, WPVI-TV, maintains a news bureau in downtown Wilmington. Salisbury's CBS affiliate, WBOC-TV, maintains bureaus in Dover and Milton. Three Philadelphia-market stations\u2014PBS member WHYY-TV, Ion affiliate WPPX, and MeTV affiliate WDPN-TV\u2014all have Wilmington as their city of license, but maintain transmitters at the market antenna farm in Roxborough and do not produce any Delaware-centric programming.\nRadio.\n\"Main Article: List of radio stations in Delaware\"\nThere are a numerous radio stations licensed in Delaware. WDEL 1150AM, WHGE-LP 95.3 FM, WILM 1450 AM, WJBR-FM 99.5, WMPH 91.7 FM, WSTW 93.7 FM, WTMC 1380 AM and WWTX 1290AM are licensed from Wilmington. WRDX 92.9 FM is licensed from Smyrna. WDOV 1410AM, WDSD 94.7 FM and WRTX 91.7 FM are licensed from Dover.\nTourism.\nDelaware is home to First State National Historical Park, a National Park Service unit composed of historic sites across the state including the New Castle Court House, Green, and Sheriff's House, Dover Green, Beaver Valley, Fort Christina, Old Swedes' Church, John Dickinson Plantation, and the Ryves Holt House. Delaware has several museums, , , , , and other .\nRehoboth Beach, together with the towns of Lewes, Dewey Beach, Bethany Beach, South Bethany, and Fenwick Island, comprise Delaware's beach resorts. Rehoboth Beach often bills itself as \"The Nation's Summer Capital\" because it is a frequent summer vacation destination for Washington, D.C., residents as well as visitors from Maryland, Virginia, and in lesser numbers, Pennsylvania. Vacationers are drawn for many reasons, including the town's charm, artistic appeal, nightlife, and tax-free shopping. According to SeaGrant Delaware, the Delaware beaches generate $6.9billion annually and over $711million in tax revenue.\nDelaware is home to several festivals, fairs, and events. Some of the more notable festivals are the Riverfest held in Seaford, the World Championship Punkin Chunkin formerly held at various locations throughout the state since 1986, the Rehoboth Beach Chocolate Festival, the Bethany Beach Jazz Funeral to mark the end of summer, the Apple Scrapple Festival held in Bridgeville, the Clifford Brown Jazz Festival in Wilmington, the Rehoboth Beach Jazz Festival, the Sea Witch Halloween Festival and Parade in Rehoboth Beach, the Rehoboth Beach Independent Film Festival, the Nanticoke Indian Pow Wow in Oak Orchard, Firefly Music Festival, and the Return Day Parade held after every election in Georgetown.\nIn 2015, tourism in Delaware generated $3.1billion, which makes up five percent of the state's GDP. Delaware saw 8.5million visitors in 2015, with the tourism industry employing 41,730 people, making it the 4th largest private employer in the state. Major origin markets for Delaware tourists include Philadelphia, Baltimore, New York City, Washington, D.C., and Harrisburg, with 97% of tourists arriving to the state by car and 75% of tourists coming from a distance of or less.\nDelaware is also home to two large sporting venues. Dover International Speedway is a race track in Dover, and Frawley Stadium in Wilmington is the home of the Wilmington Blue Rocks, a Minor League Baseball team.\nCulture and entertainment.\nSports.\nAs Delaware has no franchises in the major American professional sports leagues, many Delawareans follow either Philadelphia or Baltimore teams. In the WNBA, the Washington Mystics enjoy a major following due to the presence of Wilmington native and University of Delaware product Elena Delle Donne. The University of Delaware's football team has a large following throughout the state, with the Delaware State University and Wesley College teams also enjoying a smaller degree of support.\nDelaware is home to Dover International Speedway and Dover Downs. DIS, also known as the \"Monster Mile\", is one of only 10 tracks in the nation to have hosted 100 or more NASCAR Cup Series races. Dover Downs is a popular harness racing facility. It is the only co-located horse- and car-racing facility in the nation, with the Dover Downs track located inside the DIS track.\nDelaware is represented in rugby by the Delaware Black Foxes, a 2015 expansion club.\nDelaware has been home to professional wrestling outfit Combat Zone Wrestling (CZW). CZW has been affiliated with the annual Tournament of Death and ECWA with its annual Super8 Tournament.\nDelaware's official state sport is bicycling.\nDelaware Native Americans.\nDelaware is also the name of a Native American group (called in their own language Lenni Lenape) which was influential in the colonial period of the United States and is today headquartered in Cheswold, Kent County, Delaware. A band of the Nanticoke tribe of American Indians today resides in Sussex County and is headquartered in Millsboro, Sussex County, Delaware.\nNamesakes.\nSeveral ships have been named USS \"Delaware\" in honor of this state.\nDelawareans.\nProminent Delawareans include the du Pont family of politicians and businesspersons and the Biden family among whom Joe Biden is notable as the 46th President of the United States."}
{"id": "7931", "revid": "27138126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7931", "title": "Dictionary", "text": "A dictionary is a listing of lexemes from the lexicon of one or more specific languages, often arranged alphabetically (or by radical and stroke for ideographic languages), which may include information on definitions, usage, etymologies, pronunciations, translation, etc.. It is a lexicographical reference that shows inter-relationships among the data.\nA broad distinction is made between general and specialized dictionaries. Specialized dictionaries include words in specialist fields, rather than a complete range of words in the language. Lexical items that describe concepts in specific fields are usually called terms instead of words, although there is no consensus whether lexicology and terminology are two different fields of study. In theory, general dictionaries are supposed to be semasiological, mapping word to definition, while specialized dictionaries are supposed to be onomasiological, first identifying concepts and then establishing the terms used to designate them. In practice, the two approaches are used for both types. There are other types of dictionaries that do not fit neatly into the above distinction, for instance bilingual (translation) dictionaries, dictionaries of synonyms (thesauri), and rhyming dictionaries. The word dictionary (unqualified) is usually understood to refer to a general purpose monolingual dictionary.\nThere is also a contrast between \"prescriptive\" or \"descriptive\" dictionaries; the former reflect what is seen as correct use of the language while the latter reflect recorded actual use. Stylistic indications (e.g. \"informal\" or \"vulgar\") in many modern dictionaries are also considered by some to be less than objectively descriptive.\nAlthough the first recorded dictionaries date back to Sumerian times (these were bilingual dictionaries), the systematic study of dictionaries as objects of scientific interest themselves is a 20th-century enterprise, called lexicography, and largely initiated by Ladislav Zgusta. The birth of the new discipline was not without controversy, the practical dictionary-makers being sometimes accused by others of \"astonishing\" lack of method and critical-self reflection.\nHistory.\nThe oldest known dictionaries were cuneiform tablets with bilingual Sumerian\u2013Akkadian wordlists, discovered in Ebla (modern Syria) and dated to roughly 2300 BCE, the time of the Akkadian Empire. The early 2nd millennium BCE \"Urra=hubullu\" glossary is the canonical Babylonian version of such bilingual Sumerian wordlists. A Chinese dictionary, the c. 3rd century BCE \"Erya\", is the earliest surviving monolingual dictionary; although some sources cite the c. 800 BCE Shizhoupian as a \"dictionary\", modern scholarship considers it a calligraphic compendium of Chinese characters from Zhou dynasty bronzes. Philitas of Cos (fl. 4th century BCE) wrote a pioneering vocabulary \"Disorderly Words\" (\u1f0c\u03c4\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9 \u03b3\u03bb\u1ff6\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u03b9, \"\") which explained the meanings of rare Homeric and other literary words, words from local dialects, and technical terms. Apollonius the Sophist (fl. 1st century CE) wrote the oldest surviving Homeric lexicon. The first Sanskrit dictionary, the Amarako\u015ba, was written by Amarasimha c. 4th century CE. Written in verse, it listed around 10,000 words. According to the \"Nihon Shoki\", the first Japanese dictionary was the long-lost 682 CE \"Niina\" glossary of Chinese characters. The oldest existing Japanese dictionary, the c. 835 CE \"Tenrei Bansh\u014d Meigi\", was also a glossary of written Chinese. In \"Frahang-i Pahlavig\", Aramaic heterograms are listed together with their translation in the Middle Persian language and phonetic transcription in the Pazend alphabet. A 9th-century CE Irish dictionary, Sanas Cormaic, contained etymologies and explanations of over 1,400 Irish words. In India around 1320, Amir Khusro compiled the Khaliq-e-bari, which mainly dealt with Hindustani and Persian words.\nArabic dictionaries were compiled between the 8th and 14th centuries CE, organizing words in rhyme order (by the last syllable), by alphabetical order of the radicals, or according to the alphabetical order of the first letter (the system used in modern European language dictionaries). The modern system was mainly used in specialist dictionaries, such as those of terms from the Qur'an and hadith, while most general use dictionaries, such as the \"Lisan al-`Arab\" (13th century, still the best-known large-scale dictionary of Arabic) and \"al-Qamus al-Muhit\" (14th century) listed words in the alphabetical order of the radicals. The \"Qamus al-Muhit\" is the first handy dictionary in Arabic, which includes only words and their definitions, eliminating the supporting examples used in such dictionaries as the \"Lisan\" and the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nIn medieval Europe, glossaries with equivalents for Latin words in vernacular or simpler Latin were in use (e.g. the Leiden Glossary). The \"Catholicon\" (1287) by Johannes Balbus, a large grammatical work with an alphabetical lexicon, was widely adopted. It served as the basis for several bilingual dictionaries and was one of the earliest books (in 1460) to be printed. In 1502 Ambrogio Calepino's \"Dictionarium\" was published, originally a monolingual Latin dictionary, which over the course of the 16th century was enlarged to become a multilingual glossary. In 1532 Robert Estienne published the \"Thesaurus linguae latinae\" and in 1572 his son Henri Estienne published the \"Thesaurus linguae graecae\", which served up to the 19th century as the basis of Greek lexicography. The first monolingual dictionary written in Europe was the Spanish, written by Sebasti\u00e1n Covarrubias' \"Tesoro de la lengua castellana o espa\u00f1ola\", published in 1611 in Madrid, Spain. In 1612 the first edition of the \"Vocabolario degli Accademici della Crusca\", for Italian, was published. It served as the model for similar works in French and English. In 1690 in Rotterdam was published, posthumously, the \"Dictionnaire Universel\" by Antoine Fureti\u00e8re for French. In 1694 appeared the first edition of the \"Dictionnaire de l'Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise\". Between 1712 and 1721 was published the \"Vocabulario portughez e latino\" written by Raphael Bluteau. The Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola published the first edition of the \"Diccionario de la lengua espa\u00f1ola\" in 1780, but their \"Diccionario de Autoridades\", which included quotes taken from literary works, was published in 1726. The \"Totius Latinitatis lexicon\" by Egidio Forcellini was firstly published in 1777; it has formed the basis of all similar works that have since been published.\nThe first edition of \"A Greek-English Lexicon\" by Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott appeared in 1843; this work remained the basic dictionary of Greek until the end of the 20th century. And in 1858 was published the first volume of the Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch by the Brothers Grimm; the work was completed in 1961. Between 1861 and 1874 was published the \"Dizionario della lingua italiana\" by Niccol\u00f2 Tommaseo. Between 1862 and 1874 was published the six volumes of \"A magyar nyelv sz\u00f3t\u00e1ra\" (Dictionary of Hungarian Language) by Gergely Czuczor and J\u00e1nos Fogarasi. \u00c9mile Littr\u00e9 published the Dictionnaire de la langue fran\u00e7aise between 1863 and 1872. In the same year 1863 appeared the first volume of the \"Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal\" which was completed in 1998. Also in 1863 Vladimir Ivanovich Dahl published the \"Explanatory Dictionary of the Living Great Russian Language\". The Duden dictionary dates back to 1880, and is currently the prescriptive source for the spelling of German. The decision to start work on the \"Svenska Akademiens ordbok\" was taken in 1787.\nEnglish dictionaries in Britain.\nThe earliest dictionaries in the English language were glossaries of French, Spanish or Latin words along with their definitions in English. The word \"dictionary\" was invented by an Englishman called John of Garland in 1220 \u2014 he had written a book \"Dictionarius\" to help with Latin \"diction\". An early non-alphabetical list of 8000 English words was the \"Elementarie\", created by Richard Mulcaster in 1582.\nThe first purely English alphabetical dictionary was \"A Table Alphabeticall\", written by English schoolteacher Robert Cawdrey in 1604. The only surviving copy is found at the Bodleian Library in Oxford. This dictionary, and the many imitators which followed it, was seen as unreliable and nowhere near definitive. Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield was still lamenting in 1754, 150 years after Cawdrey's publication, that it is \"a sort of disgrace to our nation, that hitherto we have had no\u2026 standard of our language; our dictionaries at present being more properly what our neighbors the Dutch and the Germans call theirs, word-books, than dictionaries in the superior sense of that title.\" \nIn 1616, John Bullokar described the history of the dictionary with his \"English Expositor\". \"Glossographia\" by Thomas Blount, published in 1656, contains more than 10,000 words along with their etymologies or histories. Edward Phillips wrote another dictionary in 1658, entitled \"The New World of English Words: Or a General Dictionary\" which boldly plagiarized Blount's work, and the two denounced each other. This created more interest in the dictionaries. John Wilkins' 1668 essay on philosophical language contains a list of 11,500 words with careful distinctions, compiled by William Lloyd. Elisha Coles published his \"English Dictionary\" in 1676.\nIt was not until Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\" (1755) that a more reliable English dictionary was produced. Many people today mistakenly believe that Johnson wrote the first English dictionary: a testimony to this legacy. By this stage, dictionaries had evolved to contain textual references for most words, and were arranged alphabetically, rather than by topic (a previously popular form of arrangement, which meant all animals would be grouped together, etc.). Johnson's masterwork could be judged as the first to bring all these elements together, creating the first \"modern\" dictionary.\nJohnson's dictionary remained the English-language standard for over 150 years, until the Oxford University Press began writing and releasing the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" in short fascicles from 1884 onwards. It took nearly 50 years to complete this huge work, and they finally released the complete \"OED\" in twelve volumes in 1928. It remains the most comprehensive and trusted English language dictionary to this day, with revisions and updates added by a dedicated team every three months. One of the main contributors to this modern dictionary was an ex-army surgeon, William Chester Minor, a convicted murderer who was confined to an asylum for the criminally insane.\nAmerican English dictionaries.\nIn 1806, American Noah Webster published his first dictionary, \"\". In 1807 Webster began compiling an expanded and fully comprehensive dictionary, \"An American Dictionary of the English Language;\" it took twenty-seven years to complete. To evaluate the etymology of words, Webster learned twenty-six languages, including Old English (Anglo-Saxon), German, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, Hebrew, Arabic, and Sanskrit.\nWebster completed his dictionary during his year abroad in 1825 in Paris, France, and at the University of Cambridge. His book contained seventy thousand words, of which twelve thousand had never appeared in a published dictionary before. As a spelling reformer, Webster believed that English spelling rules were unnecessarily complex, so his dictionary introduced American English spellings, replacing \"colour\" with \"color\", substituting \"wagon\" for \"waggon\", and printing \"center\" instead of \"centre\". He also added American words, like \"skunk\" and \"squash,\" which did not appear in British dictionaries. At the age of seventy, Webster published his dictionary in 1828; it sold 2500 copies. In 1840, the second edition was published in two volumes. Webster's dictionary was acquired by G &amp; C Merriam Co. in 1843, after his death, and has since been published in many revised editions. Merriam-Webster was acquired by Encyclopedia Britannica in 1964.\nControversy over the lack of usage advice in the 1961 \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\" spurred publication of the 1969 \"The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language\", the first dictionary to use corpus linguistics.\nTypes.\nIn a general dictionary, each word may have multiple meanings. Some dictionaries include each separate meaning in the order of most common usage while others list definitions in historical order, with the oldest usage first.\nIn many languages, words can appear in many different forms, but only the undeclined or unconjugated form appears as the headword in most dictionaries. Dictionaries are most commonly found in the form of a book, but some newer dictionaries, like StarDict and the \"New Oxford American Dictionary\" are dictionary software running on PDAs or computers. There are also many online dictionaries accessible via the Internet.\nSpecialized dictionaries.\nAccording to the \"Manual of Specialized Lexicographies\", a specialized dictionary, also referred to as a technical dictionary, is a dictionary that focuses upon a specific subject field, as opposed to a dictionary that comprehensively contains words from the lexicon of a specific language or languages. Following the description in \"The Bilingual LSP Dictionary\", lexicographers categorize specialized dictionaries into three types: A multi-field dictionary broadly covers several subject fields (e.g. a business dictionary), a single-field dictionary narrowly covers one particular subject field (e.g. law), and a sub-field dictionary covers a more specialized field (e.g. constitutional law). For example, the 23-language Inter-Active Terminology for Europe is a multi-field dictionary, the American National Biography is a single-field, and the African American National Biography Project is a sub-field dictionary. In terms of the coverage distinction between \"minimizing dictionaries\" and \"maximizing dictionaries\", multi-field dictionaries tend to minimize coverage across subject fields (for instance, \"Oxford Dictionary of World Religions\" and \"Yadgar Dictionary of Computer and Internet Terms\") whereas single-field and sub-field dictionaries tend to maximize coverage within a limited subject field (\"The Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology\").\nAnother variant is the glossary, an alphabetical list of defined terms in a specialized field, such as medicine (medical dictionary).\nDefining dictionaries.\nThe simplest dictionary, a defining dictionary, provides a core glossary of the simplest meanings of the simplest concepts. From these, other concepts can be explained and defined, in particular for those who are first learning a language. In English, the commercial defining dictionaries typically include only one or two meanings of under 2000 words. With these, the rest of English, and even the 4000 most common English idioms and metaphors, can be defined.\nPrescriptive vs. descriptive.\nLexicographers apply two basic philosophies to the defining of words: \"prescriptive\" or \"descriptive\". Noah Webster, intent on forging a distinct identity for the American language, altered spellings and accentuated differences in meaning and pronunciation of some words. This is why American English now uses the spelling \"color\" while the rest of the English-speaking world prefers \"colour\". (Similarly, British English subsequently underwent a few spelling changes that did not affect American English; see further at American and British English spelling differences.)\nLarge 20th-century dictionaries such as the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED) and \"Webster's Third\" are descriptive, and attempt to describe the actual use of words. Most dictionaries of English now apply the descriptive method to a word's definition, and then, outside of the definition itself, provide information alerting readers to attitudes which may influence their choices on words often considered vulgar, offensive, erroneous, or easily confused. \"Merriam-Webster\" is subtle, only adding italicized notations such as, \"sometimes offensive\" or \"stand\" (nonstandard). \"American Heritage\" goes further, discussing issues separately in numerous \"usage notes.\" \"Encarta\" provides similar notes, but is more prescriptive, offering warnings and admonitions against the use of certain words considered by many to be offensive or illiterate, such as, \"an offensive term for...\" or \"a taboo term meaning...\".\nBecause of the widespread use of dictionaries in schools, and their acceptance by many as language authorities, their treatment of the language does affect usage to some degree, with even the most descriptive dictionaries providing conservative continuity. In the long run, however, the meanings of words in English are primarily determined by usage, and the language is being changed and created every day. As Jorge Luis Borges says in the prologue to \"El otro, el mismo\": \"It is often forgotten that (dictionaries) are artificial repositories, put together well after the languages they define. The roots of language are irrational and of a magical nature.\"\nSometimes the same dictionary can be descriptive in some domains and prescriptive in others. For example, according to Ghil'ad Zuckermann, the \"Oxford English-Hebrew Dictionary\" is \"at war with itself\": whereas its coverage (lexical items) and glosses (definitions) are descriptive and colloquial, its vocalization is prescriptive. This internal conflict results in absurd sentences such as \"hi tahar\u00f3g ot\u00ed kshetir\u00e9 me as\u00edti lamkhon\u00edt\" (she'll tear me apart when she sees what I've done to the car). Whereas \"hi tahar\u00f3g ot\u00ed\", literally 'she will kill me', is colloquial, \"me\" (a variant of \"ma\" 'what') is archaic, resulting in a combination that is unutterable in real life.\nHistorical dictionaries.\nA historical dictionary is a specific kind of descriptive dictionary which describes the development of words and senses over time, usually using citations to original source material to support its conclusions.\nDictionaries for natural language processing.\nIn contrast to traditional dictionaries, which are designed to be used by human beings, dictionaries for natural language processing (NLP) are built to be used by computer programs. The final user is a human being but the direct user is a program. Such a dictionary does not need to be able to be printed on paper. The structure of the content is not linear, ordered entry by entry but has the form of a complex network (see Diathesis alternation). Because most of these dictionaries are used to control machine translations or cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR) the content is usually multilingual and usually of huge size. In order to allow formalized exchange and merging of dictionaries, an ISO standard called Lexical Markup Framework (LMF) has been defined and used among the industrial and academic community.\nPronunciation.\nIn many languages, such as the English language, the pronunciation of some words is not consistently apparent from their spelling. In these languages, dictionaries usually provide the pronunciation. For example, the definition for the word \"dictionary\" might be followed by the International Phonetic Alphabet spelling (in British English) or (in American English). American English dictionaries often use their own pronunciation respelling systems with diacritics, for example \"dictionary\" is respelled as \"d\u012dk\u2032sh\u0259-n\u0115r\u2032\u0113\" in the American Heritage Dictionary. The IPA is more commonly used within the British Commonwealth countries. Yet others use their own pronunciation respelling systems without diacritics: for example, \"dictionary\" may be respelled as . Some online or electronic dictionaries provide audio recordings of words being spoken.\nExamples.\nDictionaries of other languages.\nHistories and descriptions of the dictionaries of other languages on Wikipedia include:\nOnline dictionaries.\nThe age of the Internet brought online dictionaries to the desktop and, more recently, to the smart phone. David Skinner in 2013 noted that \"Among the top ten lookups on Merriam-Webster Online at this moment are \"holistic, pragmatic, caveat, esoteric\" and \"bourgeois.\" Teaching users about words they don\u2019t already know has been, historically, an aim of lexicography, and modern dictionaries do this well.\"\nThere exist a number of websites which operate as online dictionaries, usually with a specialized focus. Some of them have exclusively user driven content, often consisting of neologisms. Some of the more notable examples include:"}
{"id": "7932", "revid": "4057701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7932", "title": "Daubentoniidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "7933", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7933", "title": "Daffodil", "text": ""}
{"id": "7934", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7934", "title": "DavidFriedman", "text": ""}
{"id": "7935", "revid": "17970985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7935", "title": "David D. Friedman", "text": "David Director Friedman (born February 12, 1945) is an American economist, physicist, legal scholar, and anarcho-capitalist theorist. He is known for his textbook writings on microeconomics and the libertarian theory of anarcho-capitalism, which is the subject of his most popular book, \"The Machinery of Freedom\". Besides \"The Machinery of Freedom\", he has authored several other books and articles, including \"Price Theory: An Intermediate Text\" (1986), \"Law's Order: What Economics Has to Do with Law and Why It Matters\" (2000), \"Hidden Order: The Economics of Everyday Life\" (1996), and \"Future Imperfect\" (2008).\nLife and work.\nDavid Friedman is the son of economists Rose and Milton Friedman. He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University in 1965, with a bachelor's degree in chemistry and physics. He later earned a master's (1967) and a Ph.D. (1971) in theoretical physics from the University of Chicago. Despite his later career, he never took a class for credit in either economics or law. He is currently a professor of law at Santa Clara University, and a contributing editor for \"Liberty\" magazine. He is an atheist. His son, Patri Friedman, has also written about libertarian theory and market anarchism, particularly seasteading.\n\"The Machinery of Freedom\".\nIn his book \"The Machinery of Freedom\" (1973), Friedman sketched a form of anarcho-capitalism where all goods and services including law itself can be produced by the free market. Friedman advocates an incrementalist approach to achieve anarcho-capitalism by gradual privatization of areas that government is involved in, ultimately privatizing the law itself. In the book, he states his opposition to violent anarcho-capitalist revolution.\nHe advocates a consequentialist version of anarcho-capitalism, arguing for it on a cost-benefit analysis of state versus no state. It is contrasted with the natural-rights approach as propounded most notably by economist and libertarian theorist Murray Rothbard.\nNon-academic interests.\nFriedman is a longtime member of the Society for Creative Anachronism, where he is known as \"Duke Cariadoc of the Bow\". He is known throughout the worldwide society for his articles on the philosophy of recreationism and practical historical recreations, especially those relating to the medieval Middle East. His work is compiled in the popular \"Cariadoc's Miscellany\". He is sometimes credited with founding the largest and longest-running SCA event, the Pennsic War; as king of the Middle Kingdom he challenged the East Kingdom, and later as king of the East accepted the challenge and lost (to himself).\nHe was a teenage wargamer who taught his school friend, Jack Radey, founder of People's War Games, how to play such wargames as Tactics II. Radey relates how Friedman and himself wrote to Charles S. Roberts claiming that they had found a first turn winning strategy for each of the two sides. Roberts replied that their interpretation of the rules was valid.\nHe is a long-time science fiction fan, and has written two fantasy novels, \"Harald\" (Baen Books, 2006) and \"Salamander\" (2011).\nHe has spoken in favor of a non-interventionist foreign policy."}
{"id": "7937", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7937", "title": "Diagonal slash argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "7938", "revid": "39526041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7938", "title": "Diatomic molecule", "text": "Diatomic molecules are molecules composed of only two atoms, of the same or different chemical elements. The prefix \"di-\" is of Greek origin, meaning \"two\". If a diatomic molecule consists of two atoms of the same element, such as hydrogen (H2) or oxygen (O2), then it is said to be homonuclear. Otherwise, if a diatomic molecule consists of two different atoms, such as carbon monoxide (CO) or nitric oxide (NO), the molecule is said to be heteronuclear. The bond in a homonuclear diatomic molecule is non-polar.\nThe only chemical elements that form stable homonuclear diatomic molecules at standard temperature and pressure (STP) (or typical laboratory conditions of 1 bar and 25\u00a0\u00b0C) are the gases hydrogen (H2), nitrogen (N2), oxygen (O2), fluorine (F2), and chlorine (Cl2).\nThe noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon) are also gases at STP, but they are monatomic. The homonuclear diatomic gases and noble gases together are called \"elemental gases\" or \"molecular gases\", to distinguish them from other gases that are chemical compounds.\nAt slightly elevated temperatures, the halogens bromine (Br2) and iodine (I2) also form diatomic gases. All halogens have been observed as diatomic molecules, except for astatine and tennessine, which are uncertain.\nOther elements form diatomic molecules when evaporated, but these diatomic species repolymerize when cooled. Heating (\"cracking\") elemental phosphorus gives diphosphorus, P2. Sulfur vapor is mostly disulfur (S2). Dilithium (Li2) and disodium (Na2) are known in the gas phase. Ditungsten (W2) and dimolybdenum (Mo2) form with sextuple bonds in the gas phase. Dirubidium (Rb2) is diatomic.\nHeteronuclear molecules.\nAll other diatomic molecules are chemical compounds of two different elements. Many elements can combine to form heteronuclear diatomic molecules, depending on temperature and pressure.\nExamples are gases carbon monoxide (CO), nitric oxide (NO), and hydrogen chloride (HCl).\nMany 1:1 binary compounds are not normally considered diatomic because they are polymeric at room temperature, but they form diatomic molecules when evaporated, for example gaseous MgO, SiO, and many others.\nOccurrence.\nHundreds of diatomic molecules have been identified in the environment of the Earth, in the laboratory, and in interstellar space. About 99% of the Earth's atmosphere is composed of two species of diatomic molecules: nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). The natural abundance of hydrogen (H2) in the Earth's atmosphere is only of the order of parts per million, but H2 is the most abundant diatomic molecule in the universe. The interstellar medium is dominated by hydrogen atoms.\nMolecular geometry.\nAll diatomic molecules are linear and characterized by a single parameter which is the bond length or distance between the two atoms. Diatomic nitrogen has a triple bond, diatomic oxygen has a double bond, and diatomic hydrogen, fluorine, chlorine, iodine, and bromine all have single bonds.\nHistorical significance.\nDiatomic elements played an important role in the elucidation of the concepts of element, atom, and molecule in the 19th century, because some of the most common elements, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, occur as diatomic molecules. John Dalton's original atomic hypothesis assumed that all elements were monatomic and that the atoms in compounds would normally have the simplest atomic ratios with respect to one another. For example, Dalton assumed water's formula to be HO, giving the atomic weight of oxygen as eight times that of hydrogen, instead of the modern value of about 16. As a consequence, confusion existed regarding atomic weights and molecular formulas for about half a century.\nAs early as 1805, Gay-Lussac and von Humboldt showed that water is formed of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of oxygen, and by 1811 Amedeo Avogadro had arrived at the correct interpretation of water's composition, based on what is now called Avogadro's law and the assumption of diatomic elemental molecules. However, these results were mostly ignored until 1860, partly due to the belief that atoms of one element would have no chemical affinity toward atoms of the same element, and also partly due to apparent exceptions to Avogadro's law that were not explained until later in terms of dissociating molecules.\nAt the 1860 Karlsruhe Congress on atomic weights, Cannizzaro resurrected Avogadro's ideas and used them to produce a consistent table of atomic weights, which mostly agree with modern values. These weights were an important prerequisite for the discovery of the periodic law by Dmitri Mendeleev and Lothar Meyer.\nExcited electronic states.\nDiatomic molecules are normally in their lowest or ground state, which conventionally is also known as the formula_1 state. When a gas of diatomic molecules is bombarded by energetic electrons, some of the molecules may be excited to higher electronic states, as occurs, for example, in the natural aurora; high-altitude nuclear explosions; and rocket-borne electron gun experiments. Such excitation can also occur when the gas absorbs light or other electromagnetic radiation. The excited states are unstable and naturally relax back to the ground state. Over various short time scales after the excitation (typically a fraction of a second, or sometimes longer than a second if the excited state is metastable), transitions occur from higher to lower electronic states and ultimately to the ground state, and in each transition results a photon is emitted. This emission is known as fluorescence. Successively higher electronic states are conventionally named formula_2, formula_3, formula_4, etc. (but this convention is not always followed, and sometimes lower case letters and alphabetically out-of-sequence letters are used, as in the example given below). The excitation energy must be greater than or equal to the energy of the electronic state in order for the excitation to occur.\nIn quantum theory, an electronic state of a diatomic molecule is represented by the molecular term symbol\nwhere formula_6 is the total electronic spin quantum number, formula_7 is the total electronic angular momentum quantum number along the internuclear axis, and formula_8 is the vibrational quantum number. formula_7 takes on values 0, 1, 2, ..., which are represented by the electronic state symbols formula_10, formula_11, formula_12...\nFor example, the following table lists the common electronic states (without vibrational quantum numbers) along with the energy of the lowest vibrational level (formula_13) of diatomic nitrogen (N2), the most abundant gas in the Earth's atmosphere. In the table, the subscripts and superscripts after formula_7 give additional quantum mechanical details about the electronic state.\nThe aforementioned fluorescence occurs in distinct regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, called \"emission bands\": each band corresponds to a particular transition from a higher electronic state and vibrational level to a lower electronic state and vibrational level (typically, many vibrational levels are involved in an excited gas of diatomic molecules). For example, N2 formula_2-formula_1 emission bands (a.k.a. Vegard-Kaplan bands) are present in the spectral range from 0.14 to 1.45 \u03bcm (micrometres). A given band can be spread out over several nanometers in electromagnetic wavelength space, owing to the various transitions that occur in the molecule's rotational quantum number, formula_17. These are classified into distinct sub-band branches, depending on the change in formula_17. The formula_19 branch corresponds to formula_20, the formula_21 branch to formula_22, and the formula_23 branch to formula_24. Bands are spread out even further by the limited spectral resolution of the spectrometer that is used to measure the spectrum. The spectral resolution depends on the instrument's point spread function.\nEnergy levels.\nThe molecular term symbol is a shorthand expression of the angular momenta that characterize the electronic quantum states of a diatomic molecule, which are also eigenstates of the electronic molecular Hamiltonian. It is also convenient, and common, to represent a diatomic molecule as two-point masses connected by a massless spring. The energies involved in the various motions of the molecule can then be broken down into three categories: the translational, rotational, and vibrational energies.\nTranslational energies.\nThe translational energy of the molecule is given by the kinetic energy expression:\nwhere formula_26 is the mass of the molecule and formula_8 is its velocity.\nRotational energies.\nClassically, the kinetic energy of rotation is\nFor microscopic, atomic-level systems like a molecule, angular momentum can only have specific discrete values given by\nAlso, for a diatomic molecule the moment of inertia is\nSo, substituting the angular momentum and moment of inertia into Erot, the rotational energy levels of a diatomic molecule are given by:\nVibrational energies.\nAnother type of motion of a diatomic molecule is for each atom to oscillate\u2014or vibrate\u2014along the line connecting the two atoms. The vibrational energy is approximately that of a quantum harmonic oscillator:\nComparison between rotational and vibrational energy spacings.\nThe spacing, and the energy of a typical spectroscopic transition, between vibrational energy levels is about 100 times greater than that of a typical transition between rotational energy levels.\nHund's cases.\nThe good quantum numbers for a diatomic molecule, as well as good approximations of rotational energy levels, can be obtained by modeling the molecule using Hund's cases.\nMnemonics.\nThe mnemonics \"BrINClHOF\", pronounced \"Brinklehof\", \"HONClBrIF\", pronounced \"Honkelbrif\", and \"HOFBrINCl\", pronounced \"Hofbrinkle\", have been coined to aid recall of the list of diatomic elements. Another method, for English-speakers, is the sentence: \"Never Have Fear of Ice Cold Beer\" as a representation of Nitrogen, Hydrogen, Fluorine, Oxygen, Iodine, Chlorine, Bromine."}
{"id": "7939", "revid": "1011509514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7939", "title": "Duopoly", "text": "A duopoly (from Greek \u03b4\u03cd\u03bf, \"duo\" (two) + \u03c0\u03c9\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd, \"polein\" (to sell)) is a type of oligopoly where two firms have dominant or exclusive control over a market. It is the most commonly studied form of oligopoly due to its simplicity. Duopolies sell to consumers in a competitive market where the choice of an individual consumer can not affect the firm. The defining characteristic of both duopolies and oligopolies is that decisions made by sellers are dependent on each other.\nDuopoly models in economics and game theory.\nThere are two principal duopoly models, Cournot duopoly and Bertrand duopoly:\nPolitics.\nLike a market, a political system can be dominated by two groups, which exclude other parties or ideologies from participation. One party or the other tends to dominate government at any given time (the Majority party), while the other has only limited power (the Minority party). According to Duverger's law, this tends to be caused by a simple winner-take-all voting system without runoffs or ranked choices. The United States and many Latin American countries have two-party government systems.\nExamples in business.\nA commonly cited example of a duopoly is that involving Visa and MasterCard, who between them control a large proportion of the electronic payment processing market. In 2000 they were the defendants in a U.S. Department of Justice antitrust lawsuit. An appeal was upheld in 2004.\nExamples where two companies control a large proportion of a market are:\nMedia.\nIn Finland, the state-owned broadcasting company Yleisradio and the private broadcaster Mainos-TV had a legal duopoly (in the economists' sense of the word) from the 1950s to 1993. No other broadcasters were allowed. Mainos-TV operated by leasing air time from Yleisradio, broadcasting in reserved blocks between Yleisradio's own programming on its two channels. This was a unique phenomenon in the world. Between 1986 and 1992 there was an independent third channel but it was jointly owned by Yle and MTV; only in 1993 did MTV get its own channel.\nIn the United Kingdom, the BBC and ITV formed an effective duopoly (with Channel 4 originally being economically dependent on ITV) until the development of multichannel from the 1990s onwards.\nIn Africa, mobile service providers Safaricom and Airtel in Kenya are examples of a Duopoly market in the telecommunication industry.\nBroadcasting.\nDuopoly is also used in the United States broadcast television and radio industry to refer to a single company owning two outlets in the same city.\nThis usage is technically incompatible with the normal definition of the word and may lead to confusion, inasmuch as there are generally more than two owners of broadcast television stations in markets with broadcast duopolies. In Canada, this definition is therefore more commonly called a \"twinstick\"."}
{"id": "7940", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7940", "title": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons (commonly abbreviated as D&amp;D or DnD) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game (RPG) originally designed by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. It was first published in 1974 by Tactical Studies Rules, Inc. (TSR). It has been published by Wizards of the Coast (now a subsidiary of Hasbro) since 1997. The game was derived from miniature wargames, with a variation of the 1971 game \"Chainmail\" serving as the initial rule system. \"D&amp;D\" publication is commonly recognized as the beginning of modern role-playing games and the role-playing game industry.\n\"D&amp;D\" departs from traditional wargaming by allowing each player to create their own character to play instead of a military formation. These characters embark upon imaginary adventures within a fantasy setting. A Dungeon Master (DM) serves as the game's referee and storyteller, while maintaining the setting in which the adventures occur, and playing the role of the inhabitants of the game world. The characters form a party and they interact with the setting's inhabitants and each other. Together they solve dilemmas, engage in battles, explore, and gather treasure and knowledge. In the process, the characters earn experience points (XP) in order to rise in levels, and become increasingly powerful over a series of separate gaming sessions.\nThe early success of \"D&amp;D\" led to a proliferation of similar game systems. Despite the competition, \"D&amp;D\" has remained the market leader in the role-playing game industry. In 1977, the game was split into two branches: the relatively rules-light game system of basic \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", and the more structured, rules-heavy game system of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (abbreviated as \"AD&amp;D\"). \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition was published in 1989. In 2000, a new system was released as \"D&amp;D\" 3rd edition, continuing the edition numbering from \"AD&amp;D\"; a revised version 3.5 was released in June 2003. These 3rd edition rules formed the basis of the d20 System, which is available under the Open Game License (OGL) for use by other publishers. \"D&amp;D\" 4th edition was released in June 2008. The 5th edition of \"D&amp;D\", the most recent, was released during the second half of 2014.\nIn 2004, \"D&amp;D\" remained the best-known, and best-selling, role-playing game in the US, with an estimated 20 million people having played the game, and more than US$1 billion in book and equipment sales worldwide. The year 2017 had \"the most number of players in its history\u201412 million to 15 million in North America alone\". \"D&amp;D 5th edition\" sales \"were up 41 percent in 2017 from the year before, and soared another 52 percent in 2018, the game's biggest sales year yet\". The game has been supplemented by many pre-made adventures, as well as commercial campaign settings suitable for use by regular gaming groups. \"D&amp;D\" is known beyond the game itself for other \"D&amp;D\"-branded products, references in popular culture, and some of the controversies that have surrounded it, particularly a moral panic in the 1980s falsely linking it to Satanism and suicide. The game has won multiple awards and has been translated into many languages.\nPlay overview.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is a structured, yet fundamentally open-ended role-playing game. It is normally played indoors with the participants seated around a tabletop. Typically, one player takes on the role of Dungeon Master (DM) while the others each control a single character, representing an individual in a fictional setting. When working together as a group, the player characters (PCs) are often described as a \"party\" of adventurers, with each member often having their own area of specialty which contributes to the success of the whole. During the course of play, each player directs the actions of their character and their interactions with other characters in the game. This activity is performed through the verbal impersonation of the characters by the players, while employing a variety of social and other useful cognitive skills, such as logic, basic mathematics and imagination. A game often continues over a series of meetings to complete a single adventure, and longer into a series of related gaming adventures, called a \"campaign\".\nThe results of the party's choices and the overall storyline for the game are determined by the DM according to the rules of the game and the DM's interpretation of those rules. The DM selects and describes the various non-player characters (NPCs) that the party encounters, the settings in which these interactions occur, and the outcomes of those encounters based on the players' choices and actions. Encounters often take the form of battles with \"monsters\"\u00a0\u2013 a generic term used in \"D&amp;D\" to describe potentially hostile beings such as animals, aberrant beings, or mythical creatures. The game's extensive rules\u00a0\u2013 which cover diverse subjects such as social interactions, magic use, combat, and the effect of the environment on PCs\u00a0\u2013 help the DM to make these decisions. The DM may choose to deviate from the published rules or make up new ones if they feel it is necessary.\nThe most recent versions of the game's rules are detailed in three core rulebooks: The \"Player's Handbook\", the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" and the \"Monster Manual\".\nThe only items required to play the game are the rulebooks, a character sheet for each player, and a number of polyhedral dice. Many players also use miniature figures on a grid map as a visual aid, particularly during combat. Some editions of the game presume such usage. Many optional accessories are available to enhance the game, such as expansion rulebooks, pre-designed adventures and various campaign settings.\nGame mechanics.\nBefore the game begins, each player creates their player character and records the details (described below) on a character sheet. First, a player determines their character's ability scores, which consist of Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Each edition of the game has offered differing methods of determining these scores. The player then chooses a race (species) such as human or elf, a character class (occupation) such as fighter or wizard, an alignment (a moral and ethical outlook), and other features to round out the character's abilities and backstory, which have varied in nature through differing editions.\nDuring the game, players describe their PCs' intended actions, such as punching an opponent or picking a lock, and converse with the DM, who then describes the result or response. Trivial actions, such as picking up a letter or opening an unlocked door, are usually automatically successful. The outcomes of more complex or risky actions are determined by rolling dice. Different polyhedral dice are used for different actions, such as a twenty-sided die to see whether a hit was made in combat, but an eight-sided die to determine how much damage was dealt. Factors contributing to the outcome include the character's ability scores, skills and the difficulty of the task. In circumstances where a character does not have control of an event, such as when a trap or magical effect is triggered or a spell is cast, a saving throw can be used to determine whether the resulting damage is reduced or avoided. In this case the odds of success are influenced by the character's class, levels and ability scores.\nAs the game is played, each PC changes over time and generally increases in capability. Characters gain (or sometimes lose) experience, skills and wealth, and may even alter their alignment or gain additional character classes. The key way characters progress is by earning experience points (XP), which happens when they defeat an enemy or accomplish a difficult task. Acquiring enough XP allows a PC to advance a level, which grants the character improved class features, abilities and skills. XP can be lost in some circumstances, such as encounters with creatures that drain life energy, or by use of certain magical powers that come with an XP cost.\nHit points (HP) are a measure of a character's vitality and health and are determined by the class, level and constitution of each character. They can be temporarily lost when a character sustains wounds in combat or otherwise comes to harm, and loss of HP is the most common way for a character to die in the game. Death can also result from the loss of key ability scores or character levels. When a PC dies, it is often possible for the dead character to be resurrected through magic, although some penalties may be imposed as a result. If resurrection is not possible or not desired, the player may instead create a new PC to resume playing the game.\nAdventures and campaigns.\nA typical \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game consists of an \"adventure\", which is roughly equivalent to a single story. The DM can either design an original adventure, or follow one of the many pre-made adventures (also known as \"modules\") that have been published throughout the history of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Published adventures typically include a background story, illustrations, maps and goals for PCs to achieve. Some include location descriptions and handouts. Although a small adventure entitled \"Temple of the Frog\" was included in the \"Blackmoor\" rules supplement in 1975, the first stand-alone \"D&amp;D\" module published by TSR was 1978's \"Steading of the Hill Giant Chief\", written by Gygax.\nA linked series of adventures is commonly referred to as a \"campaign\". The locations where these adventures occur, such as a city, country, planet or an entire fictional universe, are referred to as \"campaign settings\" or \"world\". \"D&amp;D\" settings are based in various fantasy genres and feature different levels and types of magic and technology. Popular commercially published campaign settings for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" include Greyhawk, Dragonlance, Forgotten Realms, Mystara, Spelljammer, Ravenloft, Dark Sun, Planescape, Birthright, and Eberron.\nIn addition to first-party campaigns and modules, two campaigns based on popular culture have been created. The first, based on \"Stranger Things\", was released in May 2019. A campaign based on the \"Rick and Morty vs. Dungeons and Dragons\" comic book series was later released in November 2019.\nAlternatively, DMs may develop their own fictional worlds to use as campaign settings.\nMiniature figures.\nThe wargames from which \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" evolved used miniature figures to represent combatants. \"D&amp;D\" initially continued the use of miniatures in a fashion similar to its direct precursors. The original \"D&amp;D\" set of 1974 required the use of the \"Chainmail\" miniatures game for combat resolution. By the publication of the 1977 game editions, combat was mostly resolved verbally. Thus miniatures were no longer required for game play, although some players continued to use them as a visual reference.\nIn the 1970s, numerous companies began to sell miniature figures specifically for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and similar games. Licensed miniature manufacturers who produced official figures include Grenadier Miniatures (1980\u20131983), Citadel Miniatures (1984\u20131986), Ral Partha, and TSR itself. Most of these miniatures used the 25\u00a0mm scale.\nPeriodically, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has returned to its wargaming roots with supplementary rules systems for miniatures-based wargaming. Supplements such as \"Battlesystem\" (1985 and 1989) and a new edition of \"Chainmail\" (2001) provided rule systems to handle battles between armies by using miniatures.\nDevelopment history.\nSources and influences.\nAn immediate predecessor of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was a set of medieval miniature rules written by Jeff Perren. These were expanded by Gary Gygax, whose additions included a fantasy supplement, before the game was published as \"Chainmail\". When Dave Wesely entered the Army in 1970, his friend and fellow Napoleonics wargamer Dave Arneson began a medieval variation of Wesely's Braunstein games, where players control individuals instead of armies. Arneson used \"Chainmail\" to resolve combat. As play progressed, Arneson added such innovations as character classes, experience points, level advancement, armor class, and others. Having partnered previously with Gygax on \"Don't Give Up the Ship!\", Arneson introduced Gygax to his Blackmoor game and the two then collaborated on developing \"The Fantasy Game\", the game that became \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", with the final writing and preparation of the text being done by Gygax. The name was chosen by Gygax's two-year-old daughter Cindy; upon being presented with a number of choices of possible names, she exclaimed, \"Oh Daddy, I like Dungeons &amp; Dragons best!\", although less prevalent versions of the story gave credit to his wife Mary Jo.\nMany \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" elements appear in hobbies of the mid-to-late 20th century. For example, character-based role playing can be seen in improvisational theater. Game-world simulations were well developed in wargaming. Fantasy milieux specifically designed for gaming could be seen in Glorantha's board games among others. Ultimately, however, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" represents a unique blending of these elements.\nThe world of \"D&amp;D\" was influenced by world mythology, history, pulp fiction, and contemporary fantasy novels. The importance of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"The Hobbit\" as an influence on \"D&amp;D\" is controversial. The presence in the game of halflings, elves, half-elves, dwarves, orcs, rangers, and the like, draw comparisons to these works. The resemblance was even closer before the threat of copyright action from Tolkien Enterprises prompted the name changes of hobbit to 'halfling', ent to 'treant', and balrog to 'balor'. For many years, Gygax played down the influence of Tolkien on the development of the game. However, in an interview in 2000, he acknowledged that Tolkien's work had a \"strong impact\" though he also said that the list of other influential authors was long.\nThe \"D&amp;D\" magic system, in which wizards memorize spells that are used up once cast and must be re-memorized the next day, was heavily influenced by the \"Dying Earth\" stories and novels of Jack Vance. The original alignment system (which grouped all characters and creatures into 'Law', 'Neutrality' and 'Chaos') was derived from the novel \"Three Hearts and Three Lions\" by Poul Anderson. A troll described in this work influenced the \"D&amp;D\" definition of that monster.\nOther influences include the works of Robert E. Howard, Edgar Rice Burroughs, A. Merritt, H. P. Lovecraft, Fritz Leiber, L. Sprague de Camp, Fletcher Pratt, Roger Zelazny, and Michael Moorcock. Monsters, spells, and magic items used in the game have been inspired by hundreds of individual works such as A. E. van Vogt's \"Black Destroyer\", Coeurl (the Displacer Beast), Lewis Carroll's \"Jabberwocky\" (vorpal sword) and the Book of Genesis (the clerical spell 'Blade Barrier' was inspired by the \"flaming sword which turned every way\" at the gates of Eden).\nEdition history.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has gone through several revisions. Parallel versions and inconsistent naming practices can make it difficult to distinguish between the different editions.\nOriginal game.\nThe original \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", now referred to as \"OD&amp;D\", was a small box set of three booklets published in 1974. With a very limited production budget of only $2000 \u2014 with only $100 budgeted for artwork \u2014 it was amateurish in production and assumed the player was familiar with wargaming. Nevertheless, it grew rapidly in popularity, first among wargamers and then expanding to a more general audience of college and high school students. Roughly 1,000 copies of the game were sold in the first year followed by 3,000 in 1975, and many more in the following years. This first set went through many printings and was supplemented with several official additions, such as the original Greyhawk and Blackmoor supplements (both 1975), as well as magazine articles in TSR's official publications and many fanzines.\nTwo-pronged strategy.\nIn early 1977, TSR created the first element of a two-pronged strategy that would divide \"D&amp;D\" for nearly two decades. A \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Basic Set\" boxed edition was introduced that cleaned up the presentation of the essential rules, made the system understandable to the general public, and was sold in a package that could be stocked in toy stores. Later in 1977, the first part of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\") was published, which brought together the various published rules, options and corrections, then expanded them into a definitive, unified game for hobbyist gamers. TSR marketed them as an introductory game for new players and a more complex game for experienced ones; the \"Basic Set\" directed players who exhausted the possibilities of that game to switch to the advanced rules.\nAs a result of this parallel development, the basic game included many rules and concepts which contradicted comparable ones in \"AD&amp;D\". John Eric Holmes, the editor of the basic game, preferred a lighter tone with more room for personal improvisation. \"AD&amp;D\", on the other hand, was designed to create a tighter, more structured game system than the loose framework of the original game. Between 1977 and 1979, three hardcover rulebooks, commonly referred to as the \"core rulebooks\", were released: the \"Player's Handbook\" (PHB), the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (DMG), and the \"Monster Manual\" (MM). Several supplementary books were published throughout the 1980s, notably \"Unearthed Arcana\" (1985) that included a large number of new rules. Confusing matters further, the original \"D&amp;D\" boxed set remained in publication until 1979, since it remained a healthy seller for TSR.\nRevised editions.\nIn the 1980s, the rules for \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"basic\" \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" remained separate, each developing along different paths.\nIn 1981, the basic version of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was revised by Tom Moldvay to make it even more novice-friendly. It was promoted as a continuation of the original \"D&amp;D\" tone, whereas \"AD&amp;D\" was promoted as advancement of the mechanics. An accompanying \"Expert Set\", originally written by David \"Zeb\" Cook, allowed players to continue using the simpler ruleset beyond the early levels of play. In 1983, revisions of those sets by Frank Mentzer were released, revising the presentation of the rules to a more tutorial format. These were followed by \"Companion\" (1983), \"Master\" (1985), and \"Immortals\" (1986) sets. Each set covered game play for more powerful characters than the previous. The first four sets were compiled in 1991 as a single hardcover book, the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Rules Cyclopedia\", which was released alongside a new introductory boxed set.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons 2nd Edition\" was published in 1989, again as three core rulebooks; the primary designer was David \"Zeb\" Cook. The \"Monster Manual\" was replaced by the \"Monstrous Compendium\", a loose-leaf binder that was subsequently replaced by the hardcover \"Monstrous Manual\" in 1993. In 1995, the core rulebooks were slightly revised, although still referred to by TSR as the 2nd Edition, and a series of \"Player's Option\" manuals were released as optional rulebooks.\nThe release of \"AD&amp;D 2nd Edition\" deliberately excluded some aspects of the game that had attracted negative publicity. References to demons and devils, sexually suggestive artwork, and playable, evil-aligned character types\u00a0\u2013 such as assassins and half-orcs\u00a0\u2013 were removed. The edition moved away from a theme of 1960s and 1970s \"sword and sorcery\" fantasy fiction to a mixture of medieval history and mythology. The rules underwent minor changes, including the addition of non-weapon proficiencies\u00a0\u2013 skill-like abilities that originally appeared in 1st Edition supplements. The game's magic spells were divided into schools and spheres. A major difference was the promotion of various game settings beyond that of traditional fantasy. This included blending fantasy with other genres, such as horror (Ravenloft), science fiction (Spelljammer), and apocalyptic (Dark Sun), as well as alternative historical and non-European mythological settings.\nWizards of the Coast.\nIn 1997, a near-bankrupt TSR was purchased by Wizards of the Coast. Following three years of development, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 3rd edition was released in 2000. The new release folded the Basic and Advanced lines back into a single unified game. It was the largest revision of the \"D&amp;D\" rules to date, and served as the basis for a multi-genre role-playing system designed around 20-sided dice, called the d20 System. The 3rd Edition rules were designed to be internally consistent and less restrictive than previous editions of the game, allowing players more flexibility to create the characters they wanted to play. Skills and feats were introduced into the core rules to encourage further customization of characters. The new rules standardized the mechanics of action resolution and combat. In 2003, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons v.3.5\" was released as a revision of the 3rd Edition rules. This release incorporated hundreds of rule changes, mostly minor, and expanded the core rulebooks.\nIn early 2005, Wizards of the Coast's R&amp;D team started to develop \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th Edition, prompted mainly by the feedback obtained from the \"D&amp;D\" playing community and a desire to make the game faster, more intuitive, and with a better play experience than under the 3rd Edition. The new game was developed through a number of design phases spanning from May 2005 until its release. \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th Edition was announced at Gen Con in August 2007, and the initial three core books were released June 6, 2008. 4th Edition streamlined the game into a simplified form and introduced numerous rules changes. Many character abilities were restructured into \"Powers\". These altered the spell-using classes by adding abilities that could be used at will, per encounter, or per day. Likewise, non-magic-using classes were provided with parallel sets of options. Software tools, including player character and monster building programs, became a major part of the game. This edition added the \"D&amp;D Encounters\" program; a weekly event held at local stores designed to draw players back to the game by giving \"the busy gamer the chance to play \"D&amp;D\" once a week as their schedules allow. In the past, \"D&amp;D\" games could take months, even years, and players generally had to attend every session so that the story flow wasn't interrupted. With \"Encounters\", players can come and go as they choose and new players can easily be integrated into the story continuity\".\nOn January 9, 2012, Wizards of the Coast announced that it was working on a 5th edition of the game. The company planned to take suggestions from players and let them playtest the rules. Public playtesting began on May 24, 2012. At Gen Con 2012 in August, Mike Mearls, lead developer for 5th Edition, said that Wizards of the Coast had received feedback from more than 75,000 playtesters, but that the entire development process would take two years, adding, \"I can't emphasize this enough\u00a0... we're very serious about taking the time we need to get this right.\" The release of the 5th Edition, coinciding with \"D&amp;D\"s 40th anniversary, occurred in the second half of 2014.\nSince the release of 5th edition, there have been over twenty \"Dungeon &amp; Dragons\" books published including new rulebooks, campaign guides and adventure modules. 2017 had \"the most number of players in its history \u2014 12 million to 15 million in North America alone\". Mary Pilon, for \"Bloomberg\", reported that sales of 5th edition \"Dungeon &amp; Dragons\" \"were up 41 percent in 2017 from the year before, and soared another 52 percent in 2018, the game\u2019s biggest sales year yet. [...] In 2017, 9 million people watched others play D&amp;D on Twitch, immersing themselves in the world of the game without ever having to pick up a die or cast a spell\". In 2018, Wizards of the Coast organized a massive live-stream event, the Stream of Many Eyes, where ten live-streamed sessions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" were performed on Twitch over three days. This event won the Content Marketing Institute's 2019 award for best \"In-Person (Event) Content Marketing Strategy\". \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" continued to have a strong presence on Twitch throughout 2019; this included a growing number of celebrity players and dungeon masters, such as Joe Manganiello, Deborah Ann Woll and Stephen Colbert.\nIn 2020, Wizards of the Coast announced that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" had its 6th annual year of growth in 2019 with a \"300 percent increase in sales of their introductory box sets, as well as a 65% increase on sales in Europe, a rate which has more than quadrupled since 2014\". In terms of player demographics in 2019, 39% of identified as female and 61% identified as male. 40% of players are considered Gen Z (24 years old or younger), 34% of players are in the age range of 25\u201334 and 26% of players are aged 35+. In January 2021, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that according to Liz Schuh, head of publishing and licensing for Dungeons &amp; Dragons, \"revenue was up 35% in 2020 compared with 2019, the seventh consecutive year of growth,\" and in 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, \"virtual play rose 86% [...] aided by online platforms such as Roll20 and Fantasy Grounds\". Sarah Parvini, for the \"Los Angeles Times\", wrote, \"players and scholars attribute the game\u2019s resurgent popularity not only to the longueurs of the pandemic, but also to its reemergence in pop culture \u2014 on the Netflix series \"Stranger Things\", whose main characters play D&amp;D in a basement; on the sitcom \"The Big Bang Theory\"; or via the host of celebrities who display their love for the game online\".\nLicensing.\nEarly in the game's history, TSR took no action against small publishers' production of \"D&amp;D\" compatible material, and even licensed Judges Guild to produce \"D&amp;D\" materials for several years, such as \"City State of the Invincible Overlord.\" This attitude changed in the mid-1980s when TSR took legal action to try to prevent others from publishing compatible material. This angered many fans and led to resentment by the other gaming companies. Although TSR took legal action against several publishers in an attempt to restrict third-party usage, it never brought any court cases to completion, instead settling out of court in every instance. TSR itself ran afoul of intellectual property law in several cases.\nWith the launch of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"'s 3rd Edition, Wizards of the Coast made the d20 System available under the Open Game License (OGL) and d20 System trademark license. Under these licenses, authors were free to use the d20 System when writing games and game supplements. The OGL and d20 Trademark License made possible new games, some based on licensed products like \"Star Wars\", and new versions of older games, such as \"Call of Cthulhu\".\nWith the release of the fourth edition, Wizards of the Coast introduced its Game System License, which represented a significant restriction compared to the very open policies embodied by the OGL. In part as a response to this, some publishers (such as Paizo Publishing with its \"Pathfinder Roleplaying Game\") who previously produced materials in support of the \"D&amp;D\" product line, decided to continue supporting the 3rd Edition rules, thereby competing directly with Wizards of the Coast. Others, such as Kenzer &amp; Company, are returning to the practice of publishing unlicensed supplements and arguing that copyright law does not allow Wizards of the Coast to restrict third-party usage.\nDuring the 2000s, there has been a trend towards reviving and recreating older editions of \"D&amp;D\", known as the Old School Revival. This in turn inspired the creation of \"retro-clones\", games which more closely recreate the original rule sets, using material placed under the OGL along with non-copyrightable mechanical aspects of the older rules to create a new presentation of the games.\nAlongside the publication of the 5th Edition, Wizards of the Coast established a two-pronged licensing approach. The core of the 5th Edition rules have been made available under the OGL, while publishers and independent creators have also been given the opportunity to create licensed materials directly for Dungeons &amp; Dragons and associated properties like the Forgotten Realms under a program called the DM's Guild. The DM's Guild does not function under the OGL, but uses a community agreement intended to foster liberal cooperation among content creators.\nWizards of the Coast has started to release 5th Edition products that tie into other intellectual properties \u2014 such as \"\" with the \"Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica\" (2018) and \"Mythic Odysseys of Theros\" (2020) source books. Two 5th Edition starter box sets based on TV shows, \"Stranger Things\" and \"Rick and Morty\", were released in 2019. Source books based on \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" live play series have also been released: \"Acquisitions Incorporated\" (2019) and \"Explorer's Guide to Wildemount\" (2020).\nReception.\nEric Goldberg reviewed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #1 (March 1980), rating it a 6 out of 9, and commented that \"\"Dungeons and Dragons\" is an impressive achievement based on the concept alone, and also must be credited with cementing the marriage between the fantasy genre and gaming.\" Eric Goldberg again reviewed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #3 and commented that \"\"D&amp;D\" is the FRP game played most often in most places.\"\nThe game had more than three million players around the world by 1981, and copies of the rules were selling at a rate of about 750,000 per year by 1984. Beginning with a French language edition in 1982, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has been translated into many languages beyond the original English. By 1992, the game had been translated into 14 languages and sold over copies in 44 countries worldwide. By 2004, consumers had spent more than on \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" products and the game had been played by more than 20\u00a0million people. As many as six million people played the game in 2007.\nLater editions would lead to inevitable comparisons between the game series. Griffin McElroy, for \"Polygon\", wrote: \"The game has shifted in the past four decades, bouncing between different rules sets, philosophies and methods of play. Role-playing, character customization and real-life improvisational storytelling has always been at the game's core, but how those ideas are interpreted by the game system has changed drastically edition-to-edition\". Dieter Bohn, for \"The Verge\", wrote: \"Every few years there\u2019s been a new version of \"D&amp;D\" that tries to address the shortcomings of the previous version and also make itself more palatable to its age. [...] The third edition got a reputation (which it didn\u2019t necessarily deserve) for being too complex and rules-focused. The fourth edition got a reputation (which it didn\u2019t necessarily deserve) for being too focused on miniatures and grids, too mechanical. Meanwhile, the company that owns \"D&amp;D\" had released a bunch of its old material for free as a service to fans, and some of that was built up into a competing game called \"Pathfinder\". \"Pathfinder\" ultimately became more popular, by some metrics, than \"D&amp;D\" itself\". Bohn highlighted that the 5th Edition was \"designed for one purpose: to bring \"D&amp;D\" back to its roots and win back everybody who left during the edition wars\". Henry Glasheen, for \"SLUG Magazine\", highlighted that after jumping ship during the 4th Edition era he was drawn back to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" with 5th Edition and he considers it \"the new gold standard for D20-based tabletop RPGs\". Glasheen wrote \"Fifth Edition is a compelling reason to get excited about D&amp;D again\" and \"while some will welcome the simplicity, I fully expect that plenty of people will stick to whatever system suits them best. However, this edition is easily my favorite, ranking even higher than D&amp;D 3.5, my first love in D&amp;D\".\nCurtis D. Carbonell, in the book \"Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic\", wrote: \"Negative association with earlier niche 'nerd' culture have reversed. 5e has become inclusive in its reach of players, after years of focusing on a white, male demographic. [...] At its simplest, the game system now encourages different types of persons to form a party not just to combat evil [...] but to engage in any number of adventure scenarios\".\nAcclaim.\nThe various editions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" have won many Origins Awards, including \"All Time Best Roleplaying Rules of 1977\", \"Best Roleplaying Rules of 1989\", \"Best Roleplaying Game of 2000\" and \"Best Role Playing Game and Best Role Playing Supplement of 2014\" for the flagship editions of the game. Both \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" are Origins Hall of Fame Games inductees as they were deemed sufficiently distinct to merit separate inclusion on different occasions. The independent \"Games\" magazine placed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" on their \"Games 100\" list from 1980 through 1983, then entered the game into the magazine's Hall of Fame in 1984. \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was ranked 2nd in the 1996 reader poll of \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time. \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame in 2016 and into the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2017.\nLegacy and influence.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was the first modern role-playing game and it established many of the conventions that have dominated the genre. Particularly notable are the use of dice as a game mechanic, character record sheets, use of numerical attributes and gamemaster-centered group dynamics. Within months of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"'s release, new role-playing game writers and publishers began releasing their own role-playing games, with most of these being in the fantasy genre. Some of the earliest other role-playing games inspired by \"D&amp;D\" include \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" (1975), \"Empire of the Petal Throne\" (1975), and \"Chivalry &amp; Sorcery\" (1976).\nThe role-playing movement initiated by \"D&amp;D\" would lead to release of the science fiction game \"Traveller\" (1977), the fantasy game \"RuneQuest\" (1978), and subsequent game systems such as Chaosium's \"Call of Cthulhu\" (1981), \"Champions\" (1982), \"GURPS\" (1986), and \"\" (1991). \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and the games it influenced fed back into the genre's origin\u00a0\u2013 miniatures wargames\u00a0\u2013 with combat strategy games like \"Warhammer Fantasy Battles\". \"D&amp;D\" also had a large impact on modern video games.\n\"D&amp;D\" has been compared unfavorably to other role-playing games of its time. Writing for Slate, Erik Sofge makes unfavorable comparisons between the violent incentives of \"D&amp;D\" and the more versatile role-playing experience of \"GURPS\". He claims that \"for decades, gamers have argued that since D&amp;D came first, its lame, morally repulsive experience system can be forgiven. But the damage is still being done: New generations of players are introduced to RPGs as little more than a collective fantasy of massacre.\" This criticism generated backlash from \"D&amp;D\" fans. Writing for Ars Technica, Ben Kuchera responded that Sofge had experienced a \"small-minded Dungeon Master who only wanted to kill things\", and that better game experiences are possible.\nDirector Jon Favreau credits \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" with giving him \"...\u00a0a really strong background in imagination, storytelling, understanding how to create tone and a sense of balance.\"\nControversy and notoriety.\nThe game's commercial success was a factor that led to lawsuits regarding distribution of royalties between original creators Gygax and Arneson. Gygax later became embroiled in a political struggle for control of TSR which culminated in a court battle and Gygax's decision to sell his ownership interest in the company in 1985.\nAt various times in its history, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has received negative publicity, in particular from some Christian groups, for alleged promotion of such practices as devil worship, witchcraft, suicide, and murder, and for the presence of naked breasts in drawings of female humanoids in the original \"AD&amp;D\" manuals (mainly monsters such as harpies, succubi, etc.). These controversies led TSR to remove many potentially controversial references and artwork when releasing the 2nd Edition of \"AD&amp;D\". Many of these references, including the use of the names \"devils\" and \"demons\", were reintroduced in the 3rd edition. The moral panic over the game led to problems for fans of \"D&amp;D\" who faced social ostracism, unfair treatment, and false association with the occult and Satanism, regardless of an individual fan's actual religious affiliation and beliefs.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has also been the subject of rumors regarding players having difficulty separating fantasy from reality, even leading to psychotic episodes. The most notable of these was the saga of James Dallas Egbert III, the facts of which were fictionalized in the novel \"Mazes and Monsters\" and later made into a TV movie in 1982 starring Tom Hanks. William Dear, the private investigator hired by the Egbert family to find their son when he went missing at college, wrote a book titled \"The Dungeon Master\" refuting any connection with D&amp;D and Egbert's personal issues. The game was blamed for some of the actions of Chris Pritchard, who was convicted in 1990 of murdering his stepfather. Research by various psychologists, starting with Armando Simon, has concluded that no harmful effects are related to the playing of \"D&amp;D\".\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has, however, been cited as encouraging people to socialize weekly or biweekly, teaching problem solving skills which can be beneficial in adult life, and teaching positive moral decisions.\nIn 2020, \"Polygon\" reported that \"the D&amp;D team announced that it would be making changes to portions of its 5th edition product line that fans have called out for being insensitive\". Sebastian Modak, for \"The Washington Post\", reported that the tabletop community has widely approved these changes. Modak wrote that \"in its statement addressing mistakes around portrayals of different peoples in the D&amp;D universe, Wizards of the Coast highlighted its recent efforts in bringing in more diverse voices to craft the new D&amp;D source books coming out in 2021. [...] These conversations \u2014 around depictions of race and alleged treatment of employees of marginalized backgrounds and identities \u2014 have encouraged players to seek out other tabletop roleplaying experiences\". Matthew Gault, for \"Wired\", reported positively on the roundtable discussions Wizards of the Coast has hosted with fans and community leaders on diversity and inclusion. However, Gault also highlighted that other efforts, such as revisions to old material and the release of new material, have been less great and at times minimal. Gault wrote, \"WotC appears to be trying to change things, but it keeps stumbling, and it\u2019s often the fans who pick up the pieces. [...] WotC is trying to make changes, but it often feels like lip service. [...] The loudest voices criticizing D&amp;D right now are doing it out of love. They don\u2019t want to see it destroyed, they want it to change with the times\".\nRelated products.\n\"D&amp;D\"'s commercial success has led to many other related products, including \"Dragon\" Magazine, \"Dungeon\" Magazine, an animated television series, a film series, an official role-playing soundtrack, novels, and numerous computer and video games. Hobby and toy stores sell dice, miniatures, adventures, and other game aids related to \"D&amp;D\" and its game offspring.\nIn popular culture.\n\"D&amp;D\" grew in popularity through the late 1970s and 1980s. Numerous games, films, and cultural references based on \"D&amp;D\" or \"D&amp;D\"-like fantasies, characters or adventures have been ubiquitous since the end of the 1970s. \"D&amp;D\" players are (sometimes pejoratively) portrayed as the epitome of geekdom, and have become the basis of much geek and gamer humor and satire. \"In 2017, 9 million people watched others play D&amp;D on Twitch, immersing themselves in the world of the game without ever having to pick up a die or cast a spell\".\nFamous \"D&amp;D\" players include Pulitzer Prize winning author Junot D\u00edaz, professional basketball player Tim Duncan, comedian Stephen Colbert, and actors Vin Diesel and Robin Williams. \"D&amp;D\" and its fans have been the subject of spoof films, including \"Fear of Girls\" and \"\"."}
{"id": "7941", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7941", "title": "Double jeopardy", "text": "Double jeopardy is a procedural defence (primarily in common law jurisdictions) that prevents an accused person from being tried again on the same (or similar) charges following an acquittal in the same jurisdiction. A variation in civil law countries is the peremptory plea, which may take the specific forms of ('previously acquitted') or ('previously convicted'). These doctrines appear to have originated in ancient Roman law, in the broader principle ('not twice against the same').\nAvailability as a legal defense.\nIf a double-jeopardy issue is raised, evidence will be placed before the court, which will typically rule as a preliminary matter whether the plea is substantiated; if it is, the projected trial will be prevented from proceeding. In some countries certain exemptions are permitted, such as in the United Kingdom, where in Scotland a new trial can be initiated if, for example, the acquitted has made a credible admission of guilt. Part of English law for over 800 years, it was partially abolished in England, Wales and Northern Ireland by the Criminal Justice Act 2003 where, following demand for change, serious offences may be re-tried following an acquittal if new and compelling evidence is found and for the trial to be in the public's interest. In some countries, including Canada, Mexico, and the United States, the guarantee against being \"twice put in jeopardy\" is a constitutional right. In other countries, the protection is afforded by statute.\nIn common law countries, a defendant may enter a peremptory plea of ('previously acquitted') or ('previously convicted'), with the same effect.\nDouble jeopardy is not a principle of international law. It does not apply between different countries, unless having been contractually agreed on between those countries as, for example, in the European Union (Art. 54 Schengen Convention), and in various extradition treaties between two countries.\nInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.\nThe 72 signatories and 166 parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognise, under Article 14 (7): \"No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of each country.\" However, it does not apply to prosecutions by two different sovereigns(unless the relevant extradition treaty expresses a prohibition).\nEuropean Convention on Human Rights.\nAll members of the Council of Europe (which includes nearly all European countries and every member of the European Union) have adopted the European Convention on Human Rights. The optional Protocol No. 7 to the convention, Article 4, protects against double jeopardy: \"No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again in criminal proceedings under the jurisdiction of the same State for an offence for which he or she has already been finally acquitted or convicted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of that State.\"\nAll EU states have ratified this optional protocol except for Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. In those member states, national rules governing double jeopardy may or may not comply with the provision cited above.\nMember states may, however, implement legislation which allows reopening of a case if new evidence is found or if there was a fundamental defect in the previous proceedings:\nIn many European countries, the prosecution may appeal an acquittal to a higher court. This is not regarded as double jeopardy, but as a continuation of the same case. The European Convention on Human Rights permits this by using the phrase \"finally acquitted or convicted\" as the trigger for prohibiting subsequent prosecution.\nBy country.\nAustralia.\nIn contrast to other common law nations, Australian double jeopardy law has been held to further prevent the prosecution for perjury following a previous acquittal where a finding of perjury would controvert the acquittal. This was confirmed in the case of \"R v Carroll\", where the police found new evidence convincingly disproving Carroll's sworn alibi two decades after he had been acquitted of murder charges in the death of Ipswich child Deidre Kennedy, and successfully prosecuted him for perjury. Public outcry following the overturn of his conviction (for perjury) by the High Court has led to widespread calls for reform of the law along the lines of the England and Wales legislation.\nDuring a Council of Australian Governments (COAG) meeting of 2007, model legislation to rework double jeopardy laws was drafted, but there was no formal agreement for each state to introduce it. All states have now chosen to introduce legislation that mirrors COAG's recommendations on \"fresh and compelling\" evidence.\nIn New South Wales, retrials of serious cases with a minimum sentence of 20 years or more are now possible even if the original trial preceded the 2006 reform. On 17 October 2006, the New South Wales Parliament passed legislation abolishing the rule against double jeopardy in cases where:\nOn 30 July 2008, South Australia also introduced legislation to scrap parts of its double jeopardy law, legalising retrials for serious offences with \"fresh and compelling\" evidence, or if the acquittal was tainted.\nIn Western Australia, amendments introduced on 8 September 2011 allow retrial if \"new and compelling\" evidence is found. It applies to serious offences where the penalty was life imprisonment or imprisonment for 14 years or more. Acquittal because of tainting (witness intimidation, jury tampering, or perjury) also permits retrial.\nIn Tasmania, on 19 August 2008, amendments were introduced to allow retrial in serious cases if there is \"fresh and compelling\" evidence.\nIn Victoria on 21 December 2011, legislation was passed allowing new trials where there is \"fresh and compelling DNA evidence, where the person acquitted subsequently admits to the crime, or where it becomes clear that key witnesses have given false evidence\". However, retrial applications could only be made for serious offences such as murder, manslaughter, arson causing death, serious drug offences and aggravated forms of rape and armed robbery.\nIn Queensland on 18 October 2007, the double jeopardy laws were modified to allow a retrial where fresh and compelling evidence becomes available after an acquittal for murder or a \"tainted acquittal\" for a crime carrying a 25-year or more sentence. A \"tainted acquittal\" requires a conviction for an administration of justice offence, such as perjury, that led to the original acquittal. Unlike reforms in the United Kingdom, New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia, this law does not have a retrospective effect, which is unpopular with some advocates of the reform.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms includes provisions such as section 11(h) prohibiting double jeopardy. However, the prohibition only applies after an accused person has been \"finally\" convicted or acquitted. Canadian law allows the prosecution to appeal an acquittal. If the acquittal is thrown out, the new trial is not considered to be double jeopardy since the verdict of the first trial is annulled. In rare circumstances, a court of appeal might also substitute a conviction for an acquittal. That is not considered double jeopardy since the appeal and the subsequent conviction are then deemed to be a continuation of the original trial.\nFor an appeal from an acquittal to be successful, the Supreme Court of Canada requires the Crown to show that an error in law was made during the trial and that it contributed to the verdict. It has been suggested that this test is unfairly beneficial to the prosecution. For instance, in his book \"My Life in Crime and Other Academic Adventures\", Martin Friedland contends that the rule should be changed so that a retrial is granted only when the error is shown to be \"responsible\" for the verdict, not just a factor.\nA notable example is Guy Paul Morin, who was wrongfully convicted in his second trial after the acquittal in his first trial was vacated by the Supreme Court of Canada.\nIn the Guy Turcotte case, for instance, the Quebec Court of Appeal overturned Turcotte's not criminally responsible verdict and ordered a second trial after it found that the judge committed an error in the first trial while instructions were given to the jury. Turcotte was later convicted of second-degree murder in the second trial.\nFrance.\nOnce all appeals have been exhausted on a case, the judgement is final and the action of the prosecution is closed (code of penal procedure, art. 6), except if the final ruling was forged. Prosecution for a crime already judged is impossible even if incriminating evidence has been found. However, a person who has been convicted may request another trial on the grounds of new exculpating evidence through a procedure known as \"r\u00e9vision\".\nGermany.\nThe Basic Law (\"Grundgesetz\") for the Federal Republic of Germany protects against double jeopardy if a final verdict is pronounced. A verdict is final if nobody appeals against it.\nHowever, each trial party can appeal against a verdict in the first instance. The prosecution or the defendants can appeal against a judgement if they disagree with it. In this case, the trial starts again in the second instance, the court of appeal (\"Berufungsgericht\"), which reconsiders the facts and reasons and delivers a final judgement.\nIf one of the parties disagrees with the second instance's judgement, they can appeal it only for formal judicial reasons. The case will checked in the third instance (\"Revisionsgericht\"), whether all laws are applied correctly.\nThe rule applies to the whole \"historical event, which is usually considered a single historical course of actions the separation of which would seem unnatural\". This is true even if new facts occur that indicate other crimes.\nThe Penal Procedural Code (\"Strafprozessordnung\") permits a retrial (\"Wiederaufnahmeverfahren\"), if it is in favor of the defendant or if the following events had happened:\nIn the case of an order of summary punishment, which can be issued by the court without a trial for lesser misdemeanours, there is a further exception:\nIn Germany, a felony is defined by \u00a7 12 (1) StGB as a crime that has a minimum of one year of imprisonment.\nIndia.\nA partial protection against double jeopardy is a Fundamental Right guaranteed under Article 20 (2) of the Constitution of India, which states \"No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once\". This provision enshrines the concept of \"autrefois convict\", that no one convicted of an offence can be tried or punished a second time. However, it does not extend to \"autrefois acquit\", and so if a person is acquitted of a crime he can be retried. In India, protection against \"autrefois acquit\" is a statutory right, not a fundamental one. Such protection is provided by provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure rather than by the Constitution.\nJapan.\nThe Constitution of Japan states in Article 39 that\nIn practice, however, if someone is acquitted in a lower District Court, the prosecutor can appeal to the High Court and to the Supreme Court. Only the acquittal in the Supreme Court prevents any further retrial. This process sometimes takes decades.\nThe above is not considered a violation of the constitution. Because of Supreme Court precedent, this process is all considered part of a single proceeding.\nThe Netherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the state prosecution can appeal a not-guilty verdict at the bench. New evidence can be brought to bear during a retrial at a district court. Thus one can be tried twice for the same alleged crime. If one is convicted at the district court, the defence can make an appeal on procedural grounds to the supreme court. The supreme court might admit this complaint, and the case will be reopened yet again, at another district court. Again, new evidence might be introduced by the prosecution.\nOn 9 April 2013 the Dutch senate voted 36 \"yes\" versus 35 \"no\" in favor of a new law that allows the prosecutor to re-try a person who was found not guilty in court. This new law is limited to crimes where someone died and new evidence must have been gathered. The new law also works retroactively.\nPakistan.\nArticle 13 of the Constitution of Pakistan protects a person from being punished or prosecuted more than once for the same offence. Section 403 of The Code of Criminal Procedure contemplates of a situation where as person having once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted by such court cannot be tried again for the same offence or for any other offence based on similar facts. The scope of section 403 is restricted to criminal proceedings and not to civil proceedings and departmental inquiries.\nSerbia.\nThis principle is incorporated into the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia and further elaborated in its Criminal Procedure Act.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Bill of Rights in the Constitution of South Africa forbids a retrial when there has already been an acquittal or a conviction.\nSouth Korea.\nArticle 13 of the South Korean constitution provides that no citizen shall be placed in double jeopardy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nDouble jeopardy has been permitted in England and Wales in certain (exceptional) circumstances since the Criminal Justice Act 2003.\nPre-2003.\nThe doctrines of \"autrefois acquit\" and \"autrefois convict\" persisted as part of the common law from the time of the Norman conquest of England; they were regarded as essential elements for protection of the subject's liberty and respect for due process of law in that there should be finality of proceedings. There were only three exceptions, all relatively recent, to the rules:\nIn \"Connelly v DPP\" [1964] AC 1254, the Law Lords ruled that a defendant could not be tried for any offence arising out of substantially the same set of facts relied upon in a previous charge of which he had been acquitted, unless there are \"special circumstances\" proven by the prosecution. There is little case law on the meaning of \"special circumstances\", but it has been suggested that the emergence of new evidence would suffice.\nA defendant who had been convicted of an offence could be given a second trial for an aggravated form of that offence if the facts constituting the aggravation were discovered after the first conviction. By contrast, a person who had been acquitted of a lesser offence could not be tried for an aggravated form even if new evidence became available.\nPost-2003.\nFollowing the murder of Stephen Lawrence, the Macpherson Report recommended that the double jeopardy rule should be abrogated in murder cases, and that it should be possible to subject an acquitted murder suspect to a second trial if \"fresh and viable\" new evidence later came to light. The Law Commission later added its support to this in its report \"Double Jeopardy and Prosecution Appeals\" (2001). A parallel report into the criminal justice system by Lord Justice Auld, a past Senior Presiding Judge for England and Wales, had also commenced in 1999 and was published as the Auld Report six months after the Law Commission report. It opined that the Law Commission had been unduly cautious by limiting the scope to murder and that \"the exceptions should [...] extend to other grave offences punishable with life and/or long terms of imprisonment as Parliament might specify.\"\nBoth Jack Straw (then Home Secretary) and William Hague (then Leader of the Opposition) favoured this measure. These recommendations were implemented\u2014not uncontroversially at the time\u2014within the Criminal Justice Act 2003, and this provision came into force in April 2005. It opened certain serious crimes (including murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, rape, armed robbery, and serious drug crimes) to a retrial, regardless of when committed, with two conditions: the retrial must be approved by the Director of Public Prosecutions, and the Court of Appeal must agree to quash the original acquittal due to \"new and compelling evidence\". Then Director of Public Prosecutions, Ken Macdonald QC, said that he expected no more than a handful of cases to be brought in a year. Pressure by Ann Ming, the mother of 1989 murder victim Julie Hogg\u2014whose killer, William Dunlop, was initially acquitted in 1991 and subsequently confessed\u2014also contributed to the demand for legal change. \nOn 11 September 2006, Dunlop became the first person to be convicted of murder following a prior acquittal for the same crime, in his case his 1991 acquittal of Julie Hogg's murder. Some years later he had confessed to the crime, and was convicted of perjury, but was unable to be retried for the killing itself. The case was re-investigated in early 2005, when the new law came into effect, and his case was referred to the Court of Appeal in November 2005 for permission for a new trial, which was granted. Dunlop pleaded guilty to murdering Julie Hogg and was sentenced to life imprisonment, with a recommendation he serve no less than 17 years.\nOn 13 December 2010, Mark Weston became the first person to be retried and found guilty of murder by a jury (Dunlop having confessed). In 1996 Weston had been acquitted of the murder of Vikki Thompson at Ascott-under-Wychwood on 12 August 1995, but following the discovery in 2009 of compelling new evidence (Thompson's blood on Weston's boots) he was arrested and tried for a second time. He was sentenced to life imprisonment, to serve a minimum of 13 years.\nIn December 2018, convicted paedophile Russell Bishop was also retried and found guilty by a jury for the Babes in the Wood murders of two 9-year-old girls, Nicola Fellows and Karen Hadaway, on 9 October 1986. At the original trial in 1987, a key piece of the prosecution's case rested on the recovery of a discarded blue sweatshirt. Under questioning, Bishop denied that the sweatshirt belonged to him, but his girlfriend, Jennifer Johnson, alleged the clothing was Bishop's, before she changed her story in the trial, telling the jury she had never seen the top before. Attributed to a series of blunders in the prosecution's case, Bishop was acquitted by the jury after two hours of deliberations. Three years later, Bishop was found guilty of the abduction, molestation, and attempted murder of a 7-year-old girl in February 1990. In 2014, re-examined by modern forensics, the sweatshirt contained traces of Bishop's DNA, and also had fibres on it from both of the girls' clothing. Tapings taken from Karen Hadaway's arm also yielded traces of Bishop's DNA. At the 2018 trial, a jury of seven men and five women returned a guilty verdict after two-and-a-half hours of deliberation.\nOn 14 November 2019, Michael Weir became the first person to be twice found guilty of a murder. He was originally convicted of the murder of Leonard Harris and Rose Seferian in 1999, but the conviction was quashed in 2000 by the Court of Appeal on a technicality. In 2018, new DNA evidence had been obtained and palm prints from both murder scenes were matched to Weir. Twenty years after the original conviction, Weir was convicted for the murders for a second time.\nScotland.\nThe double jeopardy rule no longer applies absolutely in Scotland since the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Act 2011 came into force on 28 November 2011. The Act introduced three broad exceptions to the rule: where the acquittal had been tainted by an attempt to pervert the course of justice; where the accused admitted their guilt after acquittal; and where there was new evidence.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn Northern Ireland the Criminal Justice Act 2003, effective 18 April 2005, makes certain \"qualifying offence\" (including murder, rape, kidnapping, specified sexual acts with young children, specified drug offences, defined acts of terrorism, as well as in certain cases attempts or conspiracies to commit the foregoing) subject to retrial after acquittal (including acquittals obtained before passage of the Act) if there is a finding by the Court of Appeal that there is \"new and compelling evidence.\"\nUnited States.\nThe ancient protection of the Common Law against double jeopardy is maintained in its full rigour in the United States, beyond the reach of any change save that of a Constitutional Amendment. The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:\nConversely, double jeopardy comes with a key exception. Under the multiple sovereignties doctrine, multiple sovereigns can indict a defendant for the same crime. The federal and state governments can have overlapping criminal laws, so a criminal offender may be convicted in individual states and federal courts for exactly the same crime or for different crimes arising out of the same facts. However, in 2016, the Supreme Court held that Puerto Rico is not a separate sovereign for purposes of the Double Jeopardy Clause. The dual sovereignty doctrine has been the subject of substantial scholarly criticism.\nAs described by the U.S. Supreme Court in its unanimous decision concerning \"Ball v. United States\" 163 U.S. 662 (1896), one of its earliest cases dealing with double jeopardy, \"the prohibition is not against being twice punished, but against being twice put in jeopardy; and the accused, whether convicted or acquitted, is equally put in jeopardy at the first trial.\" The Double Jeopardy Clause encompasses four distinct prohibitions: subsequent prosecution after acquittal, subsequent prosecution after conviction, subsequent prosecution after certain mistrials, and multiple punishment in the same indictment. Jeopardy \"attaches\" when the jury is impanelled, the first witness is sworn, or a plea is accepted.\nProsecution after acquittal.\nWith two exceptions, the government is not permitted to appeal or retry the defendant once jeopardy attaches to a trial unless the case does not conclude. Conditions which constitute \"conclusion\" of a case include\nIn these cases, the trial is concluded and the prosecution is precluded from appealing or retrying the defendant over the offence to which they were acquitted.\nThis principle does not prevent the government from appealing a pre-trial motion to dismiss or other non-merits dismissal, or a directed verdict after a jury conviction, nor does it prevent the trial judge from entertaining a motion for reconsideration of a directed verdict, if the jurisdiction has so provided by rule or statute. Nor does it prevent the government from retrying the defendant after an appellate reversal other than for sufficiency, including \"habeas corpus\", or \"thirteenth juror\" appellate reversals notwithstanding sufficiency on the principle that jeopardy has not \"terminated\".\nThe \"dual sovereignty\" doctrine allows a federal prosecution of an offence to proceed regardless of a previous state prosecution for that same offence and vice versa because \"an act denounced as a crime by both national and state sovereignties is an offence against the peace and dignity of both and may be punished by each\". The doctrine is solidly entrenched in the law, but there has been a traditional reluctance in the federal executive branch to gratuitously wield the power it grants, due to public opinion being generally hostile to such action.\nExceptions.\nThe first exception to a ban on retrying a defendant is if, in a trial, the defendant bribed the judge into acquitting him or her, since the defendant was not in jeopardy.\nThe other exception to a ban on retrying a defendant is that a member of the armed forces can be retried by court-martial in a military court, even if he or she has been previously acquitted by a civilian court.\nAn individual can be prosecuted by both the United States and a Native American tribe for the same acts that constituted crimes in both jurisdictions; it was established by the Supreme Court in \"United States v. Lara\" that as the two are separate sovereigns, prosecuting a crime under both tribal and federal law does not attach double jeopardy.\nMultiple punishment, including prosecution after conviction.\nIn \"Blockburger v. United States\" (1932), the Supreme Court announced the following test: the government may separately try and punish the defendant for two crimes if each crime contains an element that the other does not. \"Blockburger\" is the default rule, unless the governing statute legislatively intends to depart; for example, Continuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE) may be punished separately from its predicates, as can conspiracy.\nThe \"Blockburger\" test, originally developed in the multiple punishments context, is also the test for prosecution after conviction. In \"Grady v. Corbin\" (1990), the Court held that a double jeopardy violation could lie even where the \"Blockburger\" test was not satisfied, but \"Grady\" was overruled in \"United States v. Dixon\" (1993).\nProsecution after mistrial.\nThe rule for mistrials depends upon who sought the mistrial. If the defendant moves for a mistrial, there is no bar to retrial, unless the prosecutor acted in \"bad faith\", i.e. goaded the defendant into moving for a mistrial because the government specifically wanted a mistrial. If the prosecutor moves for a mistrial, there is no bar to retrial if the trial judge finds \"manifest necessity\" for granting the mistrial. The same standard governs mistrials granted sua sponte.\nRetrials are not common, due to the legal expenses to the government. However, in the mid-1980s Georgia antique dealer James Arthur Williams was tried a record four times for the murder of Danny Hansford and (after three mistrials) was finally acquitted on the grounds of self-defense. The case is recounted in the book \"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil,\" which was adapted into a film directed by Clint Eastwood (the movie combines the four trials into one).\nExternal links.\nUnited Kingdom.\nResearch and Notes produced for the UK Parliament, summarising the history of legal change, views and responses, and analyses:"}
{"id": "7942", "revid": "36378959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7942", "title": "Disbarment", "text": "Disbarment is the removal of a lawyer from a bar association or the practice of law, thus revoking their law license or admission to practice law. Disbarment is usually a punishment for unethical or criminal conduct but may also be imposed for incompetence or incapacity. Procedures vary depending on the law society.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, states regulate the Legal Profession under state law, despite many participating in a uniform scheme. Admission as a lawyer is the business of the admissions board and the Supreme Court. Disciplinary proceedings may be commenced by the Bar Association or the Law Society of which one is a member, or the board itself.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, a \"Berufsverbot\" is a ban on practicing a profession, which the government can issue to a lawyer for misconduct, \"Volksverhetzung\" or for serious mismanagement of personal finances.\nIn April 1933, the Nazi government issued a \"Berufsverbot\" forbidding the practice of law by Jews, Communists, and other political opponents, except for those protected by the \"Frontk\u00e4mpferprivileg\".\nUnited States.\nOverview.\nGenerally disbarment is imposed as a sanction for conduct indicating that an attorney is not fit to practice law, willfully disregarding the interests of a client, commingling funds, or engaging in fraud which impedes the administration of justice. In addition, any lawyer who is convicted of a felony is automatically disbarred in most jurisdictions, a policy that, although opposed by the American Bar Association, has been described as a convicted felon's just deserts.\nIn the United States legal system, disbarment is specific to regions; one can be disbarred from some courts, while still being a member of the bar in another jurisdiction. However, under the American Bar Association's Model Rules of Professional Conduct, which have been adopted in most states, disbarment in one state or court is grounds for disbarment in a jurisdiction which has adopted the Model Rules.\nDisbarment is quite rare: in 2011, only 1,046 lawyers were disbarred. Instead, lawyers are usually sanctioned by their own clients through civil malpractice proceedings, or via fine, censure, suspension, or other punishments from the disciplinary boards. To be disbarred is considered a great embarrassment and shame, even if one no longer wishes to pursue a career in the law.\nBecause disbarment rules vary by area, different rules can apply depending on where a lawyer is disbarred. Notably, the majority of US states have no procedure for permanently disbarring a person. Depending on the jurisdiction, a lawyer may reapply to the bar immediately, after five to seven years, or be banned for life.\nNotable U.S. disbarments.\nThe 20th and the 21st centuries have seen one former U.S. president and one former U.S. vice president disbarred, and another former president suspended from one bar and caused to resign from another bar rather than face disbarment.\nFormer Vice President Spiro Agnew, having pleaded no contest (which subjects a person to the same criminal penalties as a guilty plea, but is not an admission of guilt for a civil suit) to charges of bribery and tax evasion, was disbarred from Maryland, the state of which he had previously been governor.\nFormer President Richard Nixon was disbarred from New York in 1976 for obstruction of justice related to the Watergate scandal. He had attempted to resign from the New York bar, as he had done with California and the Supreme Court, but his resignation was not accepted as he would not acknowledge that he was unable to defend himself from the charges brought against him.\nIn 2001, following a 5-year suspension by the Arkansas bar, the United States Supreme Court suspended Bill Clinton, providing 40 days for him to contest disbarment. He resigned before the end of the 40 day period, thus avoiding disbarment.\nAlger Hiss was disbarred for a felony conviction, but later became the first person reinstated to the bar in Massachusetts after disbarment.\nIn 2007, Mike Nifong, the District Attorney of Durham County, North Carolina who presided over the 2006 Duke University lacrosse case, was disbarred for prosecutorial misconduct related to his handling of the case.\nIn April 2012, a three-member panel appointed by the Arizona Supreme Court voted unanimously to disbar Andrew Thomas, former County Attorney of Maricopa County, Arizona, and a former close confederate of Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio. According to the panel, Thomas \"outrageously exploited power, flagrantly fostered fear, and disgracefully misused the law\" while serving as Maricopa County Attorney. The panel found \"clear and convincing evidence\" that Thomas brought unfounded and malicious criminal and civil charges against political opponents, including four state judges and the state attorney general. \"Were this a criminal case,\" the panel concluded, \"we are confident that the evidence would establish this conspiracy beyond a reasonable doubt.\"\nJack Thompson, the Florida lawyer noted for his activism against Howard Stern, video games, and rap music, was permanently disbarred for various charges of misconduct. The action was the result of several grievances claiming that Thompson had made defamatory, false statements and attempted to humiliate, embarrass, harass or intimidate his opponents. The order was made on September 25, 2008, effective October 25. However, Thompson attempted to appeal to the higher courts in order to avoid the penalty actually taking effect. Neither the US District court, nor the US Supreme Court would hear his appeal, rendering the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court final.\nEd Fagan, a New York lawyer who prominently represented Holocaust victims against Swiss banks, was disbarred in New York (in 2008) and New Jersey (in 2009) for failing to pay court fines and fees; and for misappropriating client and escrow trust funds.\nF. Lee Bailey, noted criminal defense attorney, was disbarred by the state of Florida in 2001, with reciprocal disbarment in Massachusetts in 2002. The Florida disbarment was the result of his handling of stock in the DuBoc marijuana case. Bailey was found guilty of 7 counts of attorney misconduct by the Florida Supreme Court. Bailey had transferred a large portion of DuBoc's assets into his own accounts, using the interest gained on those assets to pay for personal expenses. In March 2005, Bailey filed to regain his law license in Massachusetts. The book \"Florida Pulp Nonfiction\" details the peculiar facts of the DuBoc case along with extended interviews with Bailey that include his own defense. Bailey is also best known for representing murder suspect O. J. Simpson in 1994."}
{"id": "7944", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7944", "title": "Dancing music", "text": ""}
{"id": "7945", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7945", "title": "Dog Tag", "text": ""}
{"id": "7946", "revid": "33082428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7946", "title": "Dog tag", "text": " \nDog tag is an informal but common term for a specific type of identification tag worn by military personnel. The tags' primary use is for the identification of casualties; as such, they have information about the personnel written on them, and convey essential basic medical information such as their blood type and history of inoculations. They often indicate religious preference as well.\nDog tags are usually fabricated from a corrosion-resistant metal. They commonly contain two copies of the information, either in the form of a single tag that can be broken in half, or as two identical tags on the same chain. This purposeful duplication allows one tag, or half-tag, to be collected from a personnel's dead body for notification, while the duplicate remains with the corpse if the conditions of battle prevent it from being immediately recovered. The term arose and became popular because of the tags' resemblance to animal registration tags.\nHistory.\nThe earliest mention of an identification tag for soldiers comes in Polyaenus (Stratagems 1.17) where the Spartans wrote their names on sticks tied to their left wrists. A type of dog tag (\"signaculum\") was given to the Roman legionary at the moment of enrollment. The legionary \"signaculum\" was a lead disk with a leather string, worn around the neck, with the name of the recruit and the indication of the legion of which the recruit was part. This procedure, together with enrollment in the list of recruits, was made at the beginning of a four-month probatory period (\"probatio\"). The recruit got the military status only after the oath of allegiance (\"sacramentum\") at the end of \"probatio\", meaning that from a legal point of view the \"signaculum\" was given to a subject who was no longer a civilian, but not yet in the military.\nIn more recent times, dog tags were provided to Chinese soldiers as early as the mid-19th century. During the Taiping revolt (1851\u201366), both the Imperialists (i.e., the Chinese Imperial Army regular servicemen) and those Taiping rebels wearing a uniform wore a wooden dog tag at the belt, bearing the soldier's name, age, birthplace, unit, and date of enlistment.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDuring the American Civil War from 1861\u20131865, some soldiers pinned paper notes with their name and home address to the backs of their coats. Other soldiers stenciled identification on their knapsacks or scratched it in the soft lead backing of their army belt buckle.\nManufacturers of identification badges recognized a market and began advertising in periodicals. Their pins were usually shaped to suggest a branch of service, and engraved with the soldier's name and unit. Machine-stamped tags were also made of brass or lead with a hole and usually had (on one side) an eagle or shield, and such phrases as \"War for the Union\" or \"Liberty, Union, and Equality\". The other side had the soldier's name and unit, and sometimes a list of battles in which he had participated.\nFranco-Prussian War.\nOn a volunteer basis Prussian soldiers had decided to wear identification tags in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. However, many rejected dog tags as a bad omen for their lives. So until eight months after the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz, with almost 8,900 Prussian casualties, only 429 of them could be identified. With the formation of the North German Confederation in 1867 Prussian military regulations became binding for the militaries of all North German member states. With the Prussian \"Instruktion \u00fcber das Sanit\u00e4tswesen der Armee im Felde\" (i.e., instruction on the medical corps organisation of the army afield) issued on 29 April 1869 the identification tags (then called \"Recognitionsmarke\"; literally \"recognition mark\") were obligatorily to be handed out to each soldier before marching afield. The Prussian Army issued identification tags for its troops at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. They were nicknamed \"Hundemarken\" (the German equivalent of \"dog tags\") and compared to a similar identification system instituted by the dog licence fee, adding tags to collars of those dogs whose owners paid the fee, in the Prussian capital city of Berlin at around the same time period.\nWorld War I.\nThe British Army introduced identity discs in place of identity cards in 1907, in the form of aluminium discs, typically made at regimental depots using machines similar to those common at fun fairs, the details being pressed into the thin metal one letter at a time.\nArmy Order 287 of September 1916 required the British Army provide all soldiers with two official tags, both made of vulcanised asbestos fibre (which were more comfortable to wear in hot climates) carrying identical details, again impressed one character at a time. The first tag, an octagonal green disc, was attached to a long cord around the neck. The second tag, a circular red disc, was threaded on a 6-inch cord suspended from the first tag. The first tag was intended to remain on the body for future identification, while the second tag could be taken to record the death.\nBritish and Empire/Commonwealth forces (Australia, Canada, and New Zealand) were issued essentially identical identification discs of basic pattern during the Great War, Second World War and Korea, though official identity discs were frequently supplemented by private-purchase items such as identity bracelets, particularly favoured by sailors who rightly believed the official discs were unlikely to survive long immersion in water.\nThe U.S. Army first authorized identification tags in War Department General Order No. 204, dated December 20, 1906, which essentially prescribes the Kennedy identification tag:\nThe U.S. Army changed regulations on July 6, 1916, so that all soldiers were issued two tags: one to stay with the body and the other to go to the person in charge of the burial for record-keeping purposes. In 1918, the U.S. Army adopted and allotted the service number system, and name and service numbers were ordered stamped on the identification tags.\nWorld War II \"notched\" tags.\nThere is a recurring myth about the notch situated in one end of the dog tags issued to United States Army personnel during World War II, and up until the Vietnam War era. It was rumored that the notch's purpose was that, if a soldier found one of his comrades on the battlefield, he could take one tag to the commanding officer and stick the other between the teeth of the soldier to ensure that the tag would remain with the body and be identified.\nIn reality, the notch was used with the Model 70 Addressograph Hand Identification Imprinting Machine (a pistol-type imprinter used primarily by the Medical Department during World War II). American dogtags of the 1930s through 1980s were produced using a Graphotype machine, in which characters are debossed into metal plates. Some tags are still debossed, using earlier equipment, and some are embossed (with raised letters) on computer-controlled equipment.\nIn the Graphotype process, commonly used commercially from the early 1900s through the 1980s, a debossing machine was used to stamp characters into metal plates; the plates could then be used to repetitively stamp such things as addresses onto paper in the same way that a typewriter functions, except that a single stroke of the printer could produce a block of text, rather than requiring each character to be printed individually. The debossing process creates durable, easily legible metal plates, well-suited for military identification tags, leading to adoption of the system by the American military. It was also realized that debossed tags can function the same way the original Graphotype plates do.\nThe Model 70 took advantage of this fact, and was intended to rapidly print all of the information from a soldier's dogtag directly onto medical and personnel forms, with a single squeeze of the trigger. However, this requires that the tag being inserted with the proper orientation (stamped characters facing down), and it was believed that battlefield stress could lead to errors. To force proper orientation of the tags, the tags are produced with a notch, and there is a locator tab inside the Model 70 which prevents the printer from operating if the tag is inserted with the notch in the wrong place (as it is if the tag is upside down).\nThis feature was not as useful in the field as had been hoped, however, due to adverse conditions such as weather, dirt and dust, water, etc. In addition, the Model 70 resembled a pistol, thus attracting the attention of snipers (who might assume that a man carrying a pistol was an officer). As a result, use of the Model 70 hand imprinter by field medics was rapidly abandoned (as were most of the Model 70s themselves), and eventually the specification that tags include the locator notch was removed from production orders. Existing stocks of tags were used until depleted, and in the 1960s it was not uncommon for a soldier to be issued one tag with the notch and one tag without. Notched tags are still in production, to satisfy the needs of hobbyists, film production, etc., while the Model 70 imprinter has become a rare collector's item.\nIt appears instructions that would confirm the notch's mythical use were issued at least unofficially by the Graves Registration Service during the Vietnam War to Army troops headed overseas.\nDog tags are traditionally part of the makeshift battlefield memorials soldiers created for their fallen comrades. The casualty's rifle with bayonet affixed is stood vertically atop the empty boots, with the helmet over the rifle's stock. The dog tags hang from the rifle's handle or trigger guard.\nNon-military usage.\nMedical condition identification.\nSome tags (along with similar items such as MedicAlert bracelets) are used also by civilians to identify their wearers and specify them as having health problems that may &lt;br&gt;\n\"(a)\" suddenly incapacitate their wearers and render them incapable of providing treatment guidance (as in the cases of heart problems, epilepsy, diabetic coma, accident or major trauma) and/or &lt;br&gt; \n\"(b)\" interact adversely with medical treatments, especially standard or \"first-line\" ones (as in the case of an allergy to common medications) and/or &lt;br&gt;\n\"(c)\" provide in case of emergency (\"ICE\") contact information and/or &lt;br&gt; \n\"(d)\" state a religious, moral, or other objection to artificial resuscitation, if a first responder attempts to administer such treatment when the wearer is non-responsive and thus unable to warn against doing so. A DNR signed by a physician is still required in some states. \nMilitary personnel in some jurisdictions may wear a supplementary medical information tag.\nFashion.\nDog tags have found their way into youth fashion by way of military chic. Originally worn as a part of a military uniform by youth wishing to present a tough or militaristic image, dog tags have since seeped out into wider fashion circles. They may be inscribed with a person's details, their beliefs or tastes, a favorite quote, or may bear the name or logo of a band or performer.\nSince the late 1990s, custom dog tags have been fashionable amongst musicians (particularly rappers), and as a marketing give-away item. Numerous companies offer customers the opportunity to create their own personalized dog tags with their own photos, logos, and text. Even high-end jewelers have featured gold and silver dog tags encrusted with diamonds and other jewels.\nVariations by country.\nAustria.\nThe Austrian Bundesheer used a single long, rectangular tag, with oval ends, stamped with blood group &amp; Rh factor at the end, with ID number underneath. Two slots and a hole stamped beneath the nunicew the tag to be broken in half, and the long bottom portion has both the ID number and a series of holes which allows the tag to be inserted into a dosimeter. This has been replaced with a more conventional, wider and rounded rectangle which can still be halved, but lacks the dosimeter reading holes.\nAustralia.\nThe Australian Defence Force issues soldiers two tags of different shapes, one octagonal and one circular, containing the following information:\nThe information is printed exactly the same on both discs. In the event of a casualty, the circular tag is removed from the body.\nBelgium.\nBelgian Forces identity tags are, like the Canadian and Norwegian, designed to be broken in two in case of fatality; the lower half is returned to Belgian Defence tail, while the upper half remains on the body. The tags contain the following information:\nCanada.\nCanadian Forces identity discs (abbreviated \"I discs\") are designed to be broken in two in the case of fatality; the lower half is returned to National Defence Headquarters with the member's personal documents, while the upper half remains on the body. The tags contain the following information:\nBefore the Service Number was introduced in the 1990s, military personnel were identified on the I discs (as well as other documents) by their Social Insurance Number.\nChina.\nThe People's Liberation Army issues two long, rectangular tags. All information is stamped in Simplified Chinese:\nPLA is introducing a two-dimensional matrix code on the second tag, the matrix code contains a link to the official database. This allows the inquirer get more details about the military personnel.\nColombia.\nThe Ej\u00e9rcito Nacional de Colombia uses long, rectangular metal tags with oval ends tags stamped with the following information:\nDuplicate tags are issued. Often, tags are issued with a prayer inscribed on the reverse.\nCyprus.\nIn Cyprus, identification tags include the following information:\nDenmark.\nThe military of Denmark use dog tags made from small, rectangular metal plates. The tag is designed to be broken into two pieces each with the following information stamped onto it:\nAdditionally, the right hand side of each half-tag is engraved 'DANMARK', .\nStarting in 1985, the individual's service number (which is the same as the social security number) is included on the tag. In case the individual dies, the lower half-tag is supposed to be collected, while the other will remain with the corpse. In the army, navy, and air force but not in the national guard, the individual's blood type is indicated on the lower half-tag only, since this information becomes irrelevant if the individual dies. In 2009, Danish dog tags were discontinued for conscripts.\nEast Germany.\nThe Nationale Volksarmee used a tag nearly identical to that used by both the Wehrmacht and the West German Bundeswehr. The oval aluminum tag was stamped \"DDR\" (Deutsche Demokratische Republik) above the personal ID number; this information was repeated on the bottom half, which was intended to be broken off in case of death. Oddly, the tag was not worn, but required to be kept in a plastic sleeve in the back of the WDA identity booklet.\nEcuador.\nThe \"Placas de identificaci\u00f3n de campa\u00f1a\" consists of two long, rectangular steel or aluminum tags with rounded corners and a single hole punched in one end. It is suspended by a US-type ball chain, with a shorter chain for the second tag. The information on the tag is:\nEstonia.\nEstonian dog tags are designed to be broken in two. The dog tag is a metallic rounded rectangle suspended by a ball chain. Information consists of four fields: \nExample: \nFinland.\nIn the Finnish Defence Forces, \"tunnuslevy\" or WWII term \"tuntolevy\" (Finnish for \"Identification plate\") is made of stainless steel and designed to be broken in two; however, the only text on it is the personal identification number and the letters \"FI\" or \"SF\" in older models, which stands for Suomi Finland, within a tower stamped atop of the upper half.\nFrance.\nFrance issues either a metallic rounded rectangle (army) or disk (navy), designed to be broken in half, bearing family name &amp; first name above the ID number.\nGermany.\nGerman Bundeswehr ID tags are an oval-shaped disc designed to be broken in half. They are made of stainless steel, heigh and width. The two sides contain different information which are mirrored upside-down on the lower half of the ID tag. They feature the following information on segmented and numbered fields:\nOn the front:\nOn the back:\nGreece.\nIn Greece, identification tags include the following information:\nHungary.\nThe Hungarian army dog tag is made out of steel, forming a 25\u00d735\u00a0mm tag designed to split diagonally. Both sides contain the same information: the soldier's personal identity code, blood group and the word HUNGARIA. Some may not have the blood group on them. These are only issued to soldiers who are serving outside of the country. If the soldier should die, one side is removed and kept for the army's official records, while the other side is left attached to the body.\nIraq.\nThe Saddam-era Iraqi Army used a single, long, rectangular metal tag with oval ends, inscribed (usually by hand) with Name and Number or Unit, and occasionally Blood Type.\nIsrael.\nDog tags of the Israel Defense Forces are designed to be broken in two. The information appears in three lines (twice):\nRecruits are issued with 2 Dogtags (4 halves total), one remains whole and worn on a necklace, and the second is broken into its halves and placed in each military boot for the purpose of Identifying dead soldiers (IDF Military Boots contain pouches on their inner sides at the 1/3 calf height, the pouches have holes corresponding in size and placement to those on the discs, allowing for fastening, often via small cable ties).\nOriginally the IDF issued two circular aluminum tags (1948 \u2013 late 1950s) stamped in three lines with serial number, family name, and first name. The tags were threaded together through a single hole onto a cord worn around the neck.\nItaly.\nRectangular piece, 35x45 mm, designed to be broken in two. Includes soldier's first and last name, coded date and place of birth, identification number, religious affiliation, and blood group.\nJapan.\nJapan follows a similar system to the US Army for its Japan Self-Defense Forces personnel, and the appearance of the tags is similar, although laser etched. The exact information order is as follows.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysian Armed Forces have two identical oval tags with this information:\nIf more information needed, another two oval wrist tags are provided. The term \"wrist tags\" can be used to refer to the bracelet-like wristwatch. The additional tags only need to be worn on the wrist, with the main tags still on the neck. All personnel are allowed to attach a small religious pendant or locket; this makes a quick identifiable reference for their funeral services.\nMexico.\nThe Ej\u00e9rcito Mexicano uses two long, very similar to the us army specification, rectangular metal tag with oval ends, embossed with Name, serial number, and blood type plus Rh factor.\nNetherlands.\nMilitary of the Netherlands identity tags, like the Canadian and Norwegian ones, are designed to be broken in two in case of a fatality; the lower end is returned to Dutch Defence Headquarters, while the upper half remains on the body. There is a difference in the Army and Airforce service number and the Navy service number:\nThe tags contain the following information:\nNorway.\nNorwegian dog tags are designed to be broken in two like the Canadian and the Dutch version:\nPoland.\nThe first dog tags were issued in Poland following the order of the General Staff of December 12, 1920. The earliest design (dubbed \"kapala\" in Polish, more properly called \"kapsel legitymacyjny\" - meaning \"identification cap\") consisted of a tin-made 30\u00d750\u00a0mm rectangular frame and a rectangular cap fitting into the frame. Soldiers' details were filled in a small ID card placed inside the frame, as well as on the inside of the frame itself. The dog tag was similar to the tags used by the Austro-Hungarian Army during World War I. In case the soldier died, the frame was left with his body, while the lid was returned to his unit together with a note on his death. The ID card was handed over to the chaplain or the rabbi.\nIn 1928, a new type of dog tag was proposed by gen. bryg. Stanis\u0142aw Rouppert, Poland's representative at the International Red Cross. It was slightly modified and adopted in 1931 under the name of Nie\u015bmiertelnik wz. 1931 (literally \"Immortalizer mark 1931\"). The new design consisted of an oval piece of metal (ideally steel, but in most cases aluminum alloy was used), roughly 40 by 50 millimeters. There were two notches on both sides of the tag, as well as two rectangular holes in the middle to allow for easier breaking of the tag in two halves. The halves contained the same set of data and were identical, except the upper half had two holes for a string or twine to go through. The data stamped on the dog tag from 2008 (wz. 2008) included:\nwith the name of Polish Army \"Si\u0142y Zbrojne RP\" and Polish Emblem.\nRhodesia.\nThe former Republic of Rhodesia used two WW2 British-style compressed asbestos fiber tags, a No. 1 octagonal (grey) tag and a No. 2 circular (red) tag, stamped with identical information. The red tag was supposedly fireproof and the grey tag rotproof. The following information was stamped on the tags: Number, Name, Initials, &amp; Religion; Blood Type was stamped on reverse. The air force and BSAP often stamped their service on the reverse side above the blood group.\nRussian Federation.\nThe Russian Armed Forces use oval metal tags, similar to the dog tags of the Soviet Army. Each tag contains the title \" () and the individual's alphanumeric number, as shown on the photo.\nSingapore.\nThe Singapore Armed Forces-issued dog tags are inscribed (not embossed) with up to four items:\nThe dog tags consist of two metal pieces, one oval with two holes and one round with one hole. A synthetic lanyard is threaded through both holes in the oval piece and tied around the wearer's neck. The round piece is tied to the main loop on a shorter loop.\nSouth Africa.\nThe South African Defense Force use two long, rectangular stainless steel tags with oval ends, stamped with serial number, name and initials, religion, and blood type.\nSouth Korea.\nThe South Korean Army issues two long, rectangular tags with oval ends, stamped (in Korean lettering). The tags are worn on the neck with a ball chain. The tags contain the information listed below:\nSouth Vietnam.\nThe South Vietnamese Army and the South Vietnamese Navy used two American-style dog tags. Some tags added religion on the back, e.g., Ph\u1eadt Gi\u00e1o for Buddhist. They were stamped or inscribed with: \nSoviet Union.\nDuring World War II, the Red Army did not issue metal dog tags to its troops. They were issued small black Bakelite cylinders containing a slip of paper with a soldier's particulars written on it. These do not hold up as well as metal dog tags.\nAfter World War II, the Soviet Army used oval metal tags, similar to today's dog tags of the Russian Armed forces. Each tag contains the title \" () and the individual's alphanumeric number.\nSpain.\nIssues a single metal oval, worn vertically, stamped \"\" above and below the 3-slot horizontal break line. It is stamped in 4 lines with:\nSweden.\nSwedish identification tags are designed to be able to break apart. The information on them was prior to 2010:\nSwedish dog tags issued to Armed Forces personnel after 2010 are, for personal security reasons, only marked with a personal identity number.\nDuring the Cold War, dog tags were issued to everyone, often soon after birth, since the threat of total war also meant the risk of severe civilian casualties. However, in 2010, the Government decided that the dog tags were not needed anymore.\nSwitzerland.\nSwiss Armed Forces ID tag is an oval shaped non reflective plaque, containing the following information:\nOn the back side the letters CH (standing for \"Confoederatio Helvetica\") are engraved next to a Swiss cross.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe British Armed Forces currently use two circular non-reflecting stainless steel tags, referred to as \"ID Disks\", engraved with the following 'Big 5' details:\nThe discs are suspended from one long chain (24 inches long) and one short chain (4.5 inches long)\nDuring World War One and Two, service personnel were issued pressed fibre identity disks, one green octagonal shaped disc, and a red round disc (some army units issued a second red round disc to be attached to the service respirator). The identity disks were hand stamped with the surname, initials, service number and religion of the holder and if in the Royal Air Force, the initials RAF. The disks were worn around the neck on a 38\" length of cotton cord, this was often replaced by the wearer with a leather bootlace. One tag was suspended below the main tag.\nThe fibre identity disks in the RAF were still in use in 1999.\nFrom 1960 these were replaced with stainless steel ID tags on a green nylon cord, two circular and one oval. The oval was withdrawn around 1990.\nUnited States.\nTags are properly known as identification tags; the term \"dog tags\" has never been used in regulations.\nThe U.S. Armed Forces typically carry two identical oval dog tags containing:\nReligious designation.\nDuring World War II, an American dog tag could indicate only one of three religions through the inclusion of one letter: \"P\" for Protestant, \"C\" for Catholic, or \"H\" for Jewish (from the word, \"Hebrew\"), or (according to at least one source) \"NO\" to indicate no religious preference. Army regulations (606-5) soon included X and Y in addition to P, C, and H: the X indicating any religion not included in the first three, and the Y indicating either no religion or a choice not to list religion.\nBy the time of the Vietnam War, some IDs spelled out the broad religious choices such as PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC, rather than using initials, and also began to show individual denominations such as \"METHODIST\" or \"BAPTIST.\" Tags did vary by service, however, such as the use of \"CATH,\" not \"CATHOLIC\" on some Navy tags. For those with no religious affiliation and those who chose not to list an affiliation, either the space for religion was left blank or the words \"NO PREFERENCE\" or \"NO RELIGIOUS PREF\" (or the abbreviation \"NO PREF\") were included.\nAlthough American dog tags currently include the recipient's religion as a way of ensuring that religious needs will be met, some personnel have them reissued without religious affiliation listed\u2014or keep two sets, one with the designation and one without\u2014out of fear that identification as a member of a particular religion could increase the danger to their welfare or their lives if they fell into enemy hands. Some Jewish personnel avoided flying over German lines during WWII with ID tags that indicated their religion, and some Jewish personnel avoid the religious designation today out of concern that they could be captured by extremists who are anti-Semitic. Additionally, when American troops were first sent to Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War there were allegations that some U.S. military authorities were pressuring Jewish military personnel to avoid listing their religions on their ID tags."}
{"id": "7949", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7949", "title": "Didjeridu", "text": ""}
{"id": "7950", "revid": "38062138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7950", "title": "Drum", "text": "The drum is a member of the percussion group of musical instruments. In the Hornbostel-Sachs classification system, it is a membranophone. Drums consist of at least one membrane, called a drumhead or drum skin, that is stretched over a shell and struck, either directly with the player's hands, or with a percussion mallet, to produce sound. There is usually a \"resonance head\" on the underside of the drum, typically tuned to a slightly lower pitch than the top drumhead. Other techniques have been used to cause drums to make sound, such as the thumb roll. Drums are the world's oldest and most ubiquitous musical instruments, and the basic design has remained virtually unchanged for thousands of years.\nDrums may be played individually, with the player using a single drum, and some drums such as the djembe are almost always played in this way. Others are normally played in a set of two or more, all played by the one player, such as bongo drums and timpani. A number of different drums together with cymbals form the basic modern drum kit.\nUses.\nDrums are usually played by striking with the hand, a beater attached to a pedal, or with one or two sticks with or without padding. A wide variety of sticks are used, including wooden sticks and sticks with soft beaters of felt on the end. In jazz, some drummers use brushes for a smoother, quieter sound. In many traditional cultures, drums have a symbolic function and are used in religious ceremonies. Drums are often used in music therapy, especially hand drums, because of their tactile nature and easy use by a wide variety of people.\nIn popular music and jazz, \"drums\" usually refers to a drum kit or a set of drums (with some cymbals, or in the case of harder rock music genres, many cymbals), and \"drummer\" to the person who plays them.\nDrums acquired even divine status in places such as Burundi, where the \"karyenda\" was a symbol of the power of the king.\nConstruction.\nThe shell almost always has a circular opening over which the drumhead is stretched, but the shape of the remainder of the shell varies widely. In the Western musical tradition, the most usual shape is a cylinder, although timpani, for example, use bowl-shaped shells. Other shapes include a frame design (tar, Bodhr\u00e1n), truncated cones (bongo drums, Ashiko), goblet shaped (djembe), and joined truncated cones (talking drum).\nDrums with cylindrical shells can be open at one end (as is the case with timbales), or can have two drum heads, one head on each end. Single-headed drums typically consist of a skin stretched over an enclosed space, or over one of the ends of a hollow vessel. Drums with two heads covering both ends of a cylindrical shell often have a small hole somewhat halfway between the two heads; the shell forms a resonating chamber for the resulting sound. Exceptions include the African slit drum, also known as a log drum as it is made from a hollowed-out tree trunk, and the Caribbean steel drum, made from a metal barrel. Drums with two heads can also have a set of wires, called snares, held across the bottom head, top head, or both heads, hence the name snare drum. On some drums with two heads, a hole or bass reflex port may be cut or installed onto one head, as with some 2010s era bass drums in rock music.\nOn modern band and orchestral drums, the drumhead is placed over the opening of the drum, which in turn is held onto the shell by a \"counterhoop\" (or \"rim\"), which is then held by means of a number of tuning screws called \"tension rods\" that screw into lugs placed evenly around the circumference. The head's tension can be adjusted by loosening or tightening the rods. Many such drums have six to ten tension rods. The sound of a drum depends on many variables\u2014including shape, shell size and thickness, shell materials, counterhoop material, drumhead material, drumhead tension, drum position, location, and striking velocity and angle.\nPrior to the invention of tension rods, drum skins were attached and tuned by rope systems\u2014as on the Djembe\u2014or pegs and ropes such as on Ewe drums. These methods are rarely used today, though sometimes appear on regimental marching band snare drums. The head of a talking drum, for example, can be temporarily tightened by squeezing the ropes that connect the top and bottom heads. Similarly, the tabla is tuned by hammering a disc held in place around the drum by ropes stretching from the top to bottom head. Orchestral timpani can be quickly tuned to precise pitches by using a foot pedal.\nSound.\nSeveral factors determine the sound a drum produces, including the type, shape and construction of the drum shell, the type of drum heads it has, and the tension of these drumheads. Different drum sounds have different uses in music. For example, the modern Tom-tom drum. A jazz drummer may want drums that are high pitched, resonant and quiet whereas a rock drummer may prefer drums that are loud, dry and low-pitched.\nThe drum head has the most effect on how a drum sounds. Each type of drum head serves its own musical purpose and has its own unique sound. Double-ply drumheads dampen high frequency harmonics because they are heavier and they are suited to heavy playing. Drum heads with a white, textured coating on them muffle the overtones of the drum head slightly, producing a less diverse pitch. Drum heads with central silver or black dots tend to muffle the overtones even more, while drum heads with perimeter sound rings mostly eliminate overtones. Some jazz drummers avoid using thick drum heads, preferring single ply drum heads or drum heads with no muffling. Rock drummers often prefer the thicker or coated drum heads.\nThe second biggest factor that affects drum sound is head tension against the shell. When the hoop is placed around the drum head and shell and tightened down with tension rods, the tension of the head can be adjusted. When the tension is increased, the amplitude of the sound is reduced and the frequency is increased, making the pitch higher and the volume lower.\nThe type of shell also affects the sound of a drum. Because the vibrations resonate in the shell of the drum, the shell can be used to increase the volume and to manipulate the type of sound produced. The larger the diameter of the shell, the lower the pitch. The larger the depth of the drum, the louder the volume. Shell thickness also determines the volume of drums. Thicker shells produce louder drums. Mahogany raises the frequency of low pitches and keeps higher frequencies at about the same speed. When choosing a set of shells, a jazz drummer may want smaller maple shells, while a rock drummer may want larger birch shells.\nHistory.\nDrums made with alligator skins have been found in Neolithic cultures located in China, dating to a period of 5500\u20132350 BC. In literary records, drums manifested shamanistic characteristics and were often used in ritual ceremonies.\nThe bronze Dong Son drum was fabricated by the Bronze Age Dong Son culture of northern Vietnam. They include the ornate Ngoc Lu drum.\nAnimal drumming.\nMacaque monkeys drum objects in a rhythmic way to show social dominance and this has been shown to be processed in a similar way in their brains to vocalizations, suggesting an evolutionary origin to drumming as part of social communication. Other primates make drumming sounds by chest beating or hand clapping, and rodents such as kangaroo rats also make similar sounds using their paws on the ground.\nTalking drums.\nDrums are used not only for their musical qualities, but also as a means of communication over great distances. The talking drums of Africa are used to imitate the tone patterns of spoken language. Throughout Sri Lankan history drums have been used for communication between the state and the community, and Sri Lankan drums have a history stretching back over 2500 years.\nDrums in art.\nDrumming may be a purposeful expression of emotion for entertainment, spiritualism and communication. Many cultures practice drumming as a spiritual or religious passage and interpret drummed rhythm similarly to spoken language or prayer. Drumming has developed over millennia to be a powerful art form. Drumming is commonly viewed as the root of music and is sometimes performed as a kinesthetic dance. As a discipline, drumming concentrates on training the body to punctuate, convey and interpret musical rhythmic intention to an audience and to the performer.\nMilitary uses.\nChinese troops used t\u00e0ig\u01d4 drums to motivate troops, to help set a marching pace, and to call out orders or announcements. For example, during a war between Qi and Lu in 684 BC, the effect of drum on soldiers' morale is employed to change the result of a major battle. Fife-and-drum corps of Swiss mercenary foot soldiers also used drums. They used an early version of the snare drum carried over the player's right shoulder, suspended by a strap (typically played with one hand using traditional grip). It is to this instrument that the English word \"drum\" was first used. Similarly, during the English Civil War rope-tension drums would be carried by junior officers as a means to relay commands from senior officers over the noise of battle. These were also hung over the shoulder of the drummer and typically played with two drum sticks. Different regiments and companies would have distinctive and unique drum beats only they recognized. In the mid-19th century, the Scottish military started incorporating pipe bands into their Highland regiments.\nDuring pre-Columbian warfare, Aztec nations were known to have used drums to send signals to the battling warriors. The Nahuatl word for drum is roughly translated as \"huehuetl\".\nThe Rig Veda, one of the oldest religious scriptures in the world, contains several references to the use of the \"Dundhubi\" (war drum). Arya tribes charged into battle to the beating of the war drum and chanting of a hymn that appears in Book VI of the Rig Veda and also the Atharva Veda where it is referred to as the \"Hymn to the battle drum\"."}
{"id": "7951", "revid": "347079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7951", "title": "Delphi", "text": "Delphi (; ), in legend previously called Pytho (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce), in ancient times was a sacred precinct that served as the seat of Pythia, the major oracle who was consulted about important decisions throughout the ancient classical world. The oracle was international in character and also fostered sentiments of Greek nationality, even though the nation of Greece was centuries away from realization. The ancient Greeks considered the centre of the world to be in Delphi, marked by the stone monument known as the omphalos (navel). The sacred precinct was in the region of Phocis, but its management had been taken away from the Phocians, who were trying to extort money from its visitors, and had been placed in the hands of an amphictyony, or committee of persons chosen mainly from Central Greece. According to the Suda, Delphi took its name from the Delphyne, the dragon who lived there and was killed by the god Apollo (in other accounts the serpent was called Python).\nThe sacred precinct occupies a delineated region on the south-western slope of Mount Parnassus. It is now an extensive archaeological site. Adjacent to the sacred precinct is a small modern town of the same name. The precinct is recognised by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site in having had a great influence in the ancient world, as evidenced by the various monuments built there by most of the important ancient Greek city-states, demonstrating their fundamental Hellenic unity. It would be impossible to remove the influence of the Delphic oracle from the written history of the times.\nDelphi and the Delphic region.\nToday Delphi is a municipality of Greece as well as a modern town adjacent to the ancient precinct. The modern town was created by moving its predecessor off the sacred precinct so that the latter could be excavated by the French School of Archaeology working in conjuction with Greek authorities. The two Delphis, old and new, are located on Greek National Road 48 between Amfissa in the west and Livadeia, capital of Voiotia, in the east. The road follows the northern slope of a pass between Mount Parnassus on the north and the mountains of the Desfina Peninsula on the south. The peninsula, triangular in shape, juts into the Gulf of Corinth. The pass is entirely one river valley, that of the river Pleistos, running from east to west, forming a natural boundary across the north of the Desfina Peninsula, and providing an easy route across it.\nOn the east side the valley joins the north-south valley leading from Davleia to Distomo, both good-sized towns. South of Distomo the valley intersects the Bay of Antikyra, which offers no port at that location. The site is known as Paralia Distomou, \"the beach of Distomo.\" Antikyra, the major port of Phocis, is a little down the coast of the peninsula.\nOn the west side the valley joins the north-south valley between Amfissa and Itea. The valley dead-ends at Amphissa. This city is more important today because a route to the Aegean side of Greece has been pushed through the mountain passes. These now strategic locations were the scenes of heavy fighting and reprisals during World War Two.\nOn the north side of the valley junction a spur of Parnassus looming over the valley made narrower by it is the site of ancient Krisa, which once was the ruling power of the entire valley system. Both Amphissa and Krissa are mentioned in the \"Iliad's\" Catalogue of Ships. It was a Mycenaean stronghold. Archaeological dates of the valley go back to the Early Helladic. Krisa itself is Middle Helladic. These early dates are comparable to the earliest dates at Delphi, suggesting Delphi was appropriated and transformed by Phocians from ancient Krisa. It is believed that the ruins of Kirra, now part of the port of Itea, were the port of Krisa of the same name as it, and that etymologically Kirra comes from Krisa.\nArchaeology of the precinct.\nThe end of Delphi.\nMost cursory accounts of Delphi include a phase they call the end of Delphi. After all, ruins are in evidence, so there must have been a time when the structures they represent were unruined. Many give the impression that the emperor's sheriff drove up the hill with a bulldozer and a wrecking ball, or a least an army of wreckers, and went back down the hill the same day having levelled the site, and that from then on it remained uninhabited. Although such a sudden event is possible with the equipment of modern times, it did not generally happen that way in ancient times, except in unusual cases, such as the fall of Carthage, when the Romans leveled the city and sowed the bare ground with salt so that nothing would grow there. Even so, the city was rebuilt. Such was never the case for Delphi. It transitioned from phase to phase. There may never have been a time when the site had no inhabitants or structures, and no one was interested in living there. It had the spring and the view.\nThe ruins in evidence date from the ancient classical period with some in the late antique period. In order to place them in evidence, the first excavators, the French School of Athens, had to clear away many tons of rubble. But that rubble contained the habitation levels of post-classical settlements, which were sacrificed in favor of the earlier ruins. The lack of this transitional material also gives the impression of a sudden ruination, which is false.\nHistory portrays Delphi as a very popular site. Once in a century or two it was burned by some interloper, and then promptly rebuilt better than before. After Hellenic society transitioned from pagan to Christian, Delphi remained just as popular as it had been. Still pagan, it often honored the Christian emperors, while they allowed it to stand. Both religions were practiced there side-by-side. Finally, however, use of the oracle fell off to such a degree that it could no longer be maintained. The other aspects went on: the games, the worship of Apollo in the temple. Regretfully the Christian emperors dealt with all the pagan sites as a loose end. Delphi transitioned to a secular site in which churches were built. Without the oracle, there was not much point in frequenting a high-altitude, out-of-the-way place. The population fell off to a small village.\nThe place had not ended, however. Archaeology and tourism infused it with a whole new life. It may well be frequented by just as many people as frequented it in classical days. It earns its own revenue. The geologic problems are just as bad as they were in ancient times: faults, slippery slopes, earthquakes, rockslides, runoff. As at all major archaeological sites, the effort to maintain the ruins rivals the original effort to maintain the structures.\nThe classical site had flourished because of its popularity. After the change of religion, popularity and frequentation fell off sharply. The oracle could no longer cover operating expenses. After a line of Christian emperors, Julian, reigning 361-363 (not long), rejecting Christianity in favor of neoplatonism, for which he is called Julian the Apostate, attempted to restore the prior religions, paganism and Judaism. He sent his physician to Delphi to rebuild the Temple of Apollo, and received an oracle for his efforts that \"the speaking water has been silenced,\" which became known as \"the last oracle\" and is recorded by George Kedrenos.\nExcavation.\nThe site was first briefly excavated in 1880 by Bernard Haussoullier (1852-1926) on behalf of the French School at Athens, of which he was a sometime member. The site was then occupied by the village of Kastri, about 100 houses, 200 people. Kastri (\"fort\") had been there since the destruction of the place by Theodosius I in 390. He probably left a fort to make sure it was not repopulated, except that the fort became the new village. They were mining the stone for re-use in their own buildings. British and French travellers visiting the site suspected it was ancient Delphi. Before a systematic excavation of the site could be undertaken, the village had to be relocated but the residents resisted.\nThe opportunity to relocate the village occurred when it was substantially damaged by an earthquake, with villagers offered a completely new village in exchange for the old site. In 1893 the French Archaeological School removed vast quantities of soil from numerous landslides to reveal both the major buildings and structures of the sanctuary of Apollo and of Athena Pronoia along with thousands of objects, inscriptions and sculptures.\nDuring the Great Excavation were discovered architectural members from a 5th-century Christian basilica, when Delphi was a bishopric. Other important Late Roman buildings are the Eastern Baths, the house with the peristyle, the Roman Agora, the large cistern usw. At the outskirts of the city there were located late Roman cemeteries.\nTo the southeast of the precinct of Apollo lay the so-called Southeastern Mansion, a building with a 65-meter-long fa\u00e7ade, spread over four levels, with four triclinia and private baths. Large storage jars kept the provisions, whereas other pottery vessels and luxury items were discovered in the rooms. Among the finds stands out a tiny leopard made of mother of pearl, possibly of Sassanian origin, on display in the ground floor gallery of the Delphi Archaeological Museum. The mansion dates to the beginning of the 5th century and functioned as a private house until 580, later however it was transformed into a potters' workshop. It is only then, in the beginning of the 6th century, that the city seems to decline: its size is reduced and its trade contacts seem to be drastically diminished. Local pottery production is produced in large quantities: it is coarser and made of reddish clay, aiming at satisfying the needs of the inhabitants.\nThe Sacred Way remained the main street of the settlement, transformed, however, into a street with commercial and industrial use. Around the agora were built workshops as well as the only intra muros early Christian basilica. The domestic area spread mainly in the western part of the settlement. The houses were rather spacious and two large cisterns provided running water to them.\nDelphi Archaeological Museum.\nThe Delphi Archaeological Museum is at the foot of the main archaeological complex, on the east side of the village, and on the north side of the main road. The museum houses artifacts associated with ancient Delphi, including the earliest known notation of a melody, the Charioteer of Delphi, Kleobis and Biton, golden treasures discovered beneath the Sacred Way, the Sphinx of Naxos, and fragments of reliefs from the Siphnian Treasury. Immediately adjacent to the exit is the inscription that mentions the Roman proconsul Gallio.\nEntries to the museum and to the main complex are separate and chargeable. A reduced rate ticket gets entry to both. There is a small cafe, and a post office by the museum.\nArchitecture of the precinct.\nMost of the ruins that survive today date from the most intense period of activity at the site in the 6th century BC.\nTemple of Apollo.\nThe ruins of the Temple of Delphi visible today date from the 4th century\u00a0BC, and are of a peripteral Doric building. It was erected by Spintharus, Xenodoros, and Agathon on the remains of an earlier temple, dated to the 6th century\u00a0BC which itself was erected on the site of a 7th-century\u00a0BC construction attributed in legend to the architects Trophonios and Agamedes.\nAncient tradition accounted for four temples that successively occupied the site before the 548/7\u00a0BC fire, following which the Alcmaeonids built a fifth. The poet Pindar celebrated the Alcmaeonids' temple in \"Pythian\" 7.8-9 and he also provided details of the third building (\"Paean\" 8. 65-75). Other details are given by Pausanias (10.5.9-13) and the Homeric Hymn to Apollo (294 ff.). The first temple was said to have been constructed out of olive branches from Tempe. The second was made by bees out of wax and wings but was miraculously carried off by a powerful wind and deposited among the Hyperboreans. The third, as described by Pindar, was created by the gods Hephaestus and Athena, but its architectural details included Siren-like figures or \"Enchantresses\", whose baneful songs eventually provoked the Olympian gods to bury the temple in the earth (according to Pausanias, it was destroyed by earthquake and fire). In Pindar's words addressed to the Muses:\nThe fourth temple was said to have been constructed from stone by Trophonius and Agamedes.\nHowever, a new theory gives a completely new explanation of the above myth of the four temples of Delphi.\nTreasuries.\nFrom the entrance of the upper site, continuing up the slope on the Sacred Way almost to the Temple of Apollo, are a large number of votive statues, and numerous so-called treasuries. These were built by many of the Greek city-states to commemorate victories and to thank the oracle for her advice, which was thought to have contributed to those victories. These buildings held the offerings made to Apollo; these were frequently a \"tithe\" or tenth of the spoils of a battle. The most impressive is the now-restored Athenian Treasury, built to commemorate their victory at the Battle of Marathon in 490\u00a0BC.\nThe Siphnian Treasury was dedicated by the city of Siphnos whose citizens gave a tithe of the yield from their silver mines until the mines came to an abrupt end when the sea flooded the workings.\nOne of the largest of the treasuries was that of Argos. Having built it in the late classical period, the Argives took great pride in establishing their place at Delphi amongst the other city-states. Completed in 380 BC, the treasury seems to draw inspiration mostly from the Temple of Hera located in the Argolis. However, recent analysis of the Archaic elements of the treasury suggest that its founding preceded this.\nOther identifiable treasuries are those of the Sikyonians, the Boeotians and the Thebans.\nAltar of the Chians.\nLocated in front of the Temple of Apollo, the main altar of the sanctuary was paid for and built by the people of Chios. It is dated to the 5th century BC by the inscription on its cornice. Made entirely of black marble, except for the base and cornice, the altar would have made a striking impression. It was restored in 1920.\n&lt;br&gt;\nStoa of the Athenians.\nThe stoa, or open-sided, covered porch, is placed in an approximately E-W alignment along the base of the polygonal wall retaining the terrace on which the Temple of Apollo sits. There is no archaeological suggestion of a connection to the temple. The stoa opened to the Sacred Way. The nearby presence of the Treasury of the Athenians suggests that this quarter of Delphi was used for Athenian business or politics, as stoas are generally found in market-places.\nAlthough the architecture at Delphi is generally Doric, a plain style, in keeping with the Phocian traditions, which were Doric, the Athenians did not prefer the Doric. The stoa was built in their own preferred style, the Ionic order, the capitals of the columns being a sure indicator. In the Ionic order they are floral and ornate, although not as much as the Corinthian, which is in deficit there. The remaining porch structure contains seven fluted columns, unusually carved from single pieces of stone (most columns were constructed from a series of discs joined together). The inscription on the stylobate indicates that it was built by the Athenians after their naval victory over the Persians in 478\u00a0BC, to house their war trophies. At that time the Athenians and the Spartans were on the same side.\nSibyl rock.\nThe Sibyl rock is a pulpit-like outcrop of rock between the Athenian Treasury and the Stoa of the Athenians upon the sacred way which leads up to the temple of Apollo in the archaeological area of Delphi. It is claimed to be where an ancient Sibyl pre-dating the Pythia of Apollo sat to deliver her prophecies. Or, the Pythia might have stood there, or an acolyte whose function was to deliver the final prophecy. The rock seems ideal for public speaking.\nTheatre.\nThe ancient theatre at Delphi was built further up the hill from the Temple of Apollo giving spectators a view of the entire sanctuary and the valley below. It was originally built in the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC but was remodeled on several occasions, particularly in 160/159 B.C. at the expenses of king Eumenes II of Pergamon and in 67 A.D. on the occasion of emperor Nero's visit.\nThe koilon (cavea) leans against the natural slope of the mountain whereas its eastern part overrides a little torrent that led the water of the fountain Cassotis right underneath the temple of Apollo. The orchestra was initially a full circle with a diameter measuring 7 meters. The rectangular scene building ended up in two arched openings, of which the foundations are preserved today. Access to the theatre was possible through the parodoi, i.e. the side corridors. On the support walls of the parodoi are engraved large numbers of manumission inscriptions recording fictitious sales of the slaves to the god.\nThe koilon was divided horizontally in two zones via a corridor called diazoma. The lower zone had 27 rows of seats and the upper one only 8. Six radially arranged stairs divided the lower part of the koilon in seven tiers. The theatre could accommodate about 4,500 spectators.\nOn the occasion of Nero's visit to Greece in 67 A.D. various alterations took place. The orchestra was paved and delimited by a parapet made of stone. The proscenium was replaced by a low pedestal, the pulpitum; its fa\u00e7ade was decorated with scenes from Hercules' myth in relief. Further repairs and transformations took place in the 2nd century A.D. Pausanias mentions that these were carried out under the auspices of Herod Atticus.\nIn antiquity, the theatre was used for the vocal and musical contests which formed part of the programme of the Pythian Games in the late Hellenistic and Roman period. The theatre was abandoned when the sanctuary declined in Late Antiquity. After its excavation and initial restoration it hosted theatrical performances during the Delphic Festivals organized by A. Sikelianos and his wife, Eva Palmer, in 1927 and in 1930. It has recently been restored again as the serious landslides posed a grave threat for its stability for decades.\nTholos.\nThe tholos at the sanctuary of Athena Pronoia (\u1f08\u03b8\u03b7\u03bd\u1fb6 \u03a0\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9\u03b1, \"Athena of forethought\") is a circular building that was constructed between 380 and 360\u00a0BC. It consisted of 20 Doric columns arranged with an exterior diameter of 14.76\u00a0meters, with 10 Corinthian columns in the interior.\nThe Tholos is located approximately a half a mile (800 m) from the main ruins at Delphi (at ). Three of the Doric columns have been restored, making it the most popular site at Delphi for tourists to take photographs.\nThe architect of the \"vaulted temple at Delphi\" is named by Vitruvius, in \"De architectura\" Book VII, as Theodorus Phoceus (not Theodorus of Samos, whom Vitruvius names separately).\nGymnasium.\nThe gymnasium, which is half a mile away from the main sanctuary, was a series of buildings used by the youth of Delphi. The building consisted of two levels: a stoa on the upper level providing open space, and a palaestra, pool and baths on lower floor. These pools and baths were said to have magical powers, and imparted the ability to communicate to Apollo himself.\nStadium.\nThe stadium is located further up the hill, beyond the \"via sacra\" and the theatre. It was originally built in the 5th century\u00a0BC but was altered in later centuries. The last major remodelling took place in the 2nd century\u00a0AD under the patronage of Herodes Atticus when the stone seating was built and (arched) entrance. It could seat 6500 spectators and the track was 177\u00a0metres long and 25.5\u00a0metres wide.\nHippodrome.\nIt was at the Pythian games that prominent political leaders, such as Cleisthenes, tyrant of Sikyon, and Hieron, tyrant of Syracuse, competed with their chariots. The hippodrome where these events took place was referred to by Pindar, and this monument was sought by archaeologists for over two centuries.\nIts traces have recently been found at Gonia in the plain of Krisa in the place where the original stadium was sited.\nPolygonal wall.\nThe retaining wall was built to support the terrace housing the construction of the second temple of Apollo in 548\u00a0BC. Its name is taken from the polygonal masonry of which it is constructed. At a later date, from 200\u00a0BC onwards, the stones were inscribed with the manumission contracts of slaves who were consecrated to Apollo. Approximately a thousand manumissions are recorded on the wall.\nCastalian spring.\nThe sacred spring of Delphi lies in the ravine of the Phaedriades. The preserved remains of two monumental fountains that received the water from the spring date to the Archaic period and the Roman, with the latter cut into the rock.\nAthletic statues.\nDelphi is famous for its many preserved athletic statues. It is known that Olympia originally housed far more of these statues, but time brought ruin to many of them, leaving Delphi as the main site of athletic statues. Kleobis and Biton, two brothers renowned for their strength, are modeled in two of the earliest known athletic statues at Delphi. The statues commemorate their feat of pulling their mother's cart several miles to the Sanctuary of Hera in the absence of oxen. The neighbors were most impressed and their mother asked Hera to grant them the greatest gift. When they entered Hera's temple, they fell into a slumber and never woke, dying at the height of their admiration, the perfect gift.\nThe Charioteer of Delphi is another ancient relic that has withstood the centuries. It is one of the best known statues from antiquity. The charioteer has lost many features, including his chariot and his left arm, but he stands as a tribute to athletic art of antiquity.\nMyths regarding the origin of the precinct.\nA myth is a story based on fantasy or belief rather than known fact. Ancient Greek culture used them frequently in many different contexts. They are only known to moderns through mention in ancient Greek writings. A writer typically had access to writings at a library or private archive, unless he was wealthy enough to have his own copies made. All books were hand-written. Authors referred to other authors whose books they had before them, or had taken notes from. Often the source of the story was not identified, but even if it was, the source may have taken it from some other book. Sometimes authors wrote down myths related to them orally.\nIt is thus not possible to date myths. They could have come from any prior time. Often the date of the book relating the myth cannot be determined within centuries. A myth cannot with any certainty be attributed to any century, although the written source may be. Scholars are not entirely without dating methods, however. The content of the myth may resemble or imply circumstances of known or probable provenience. The Iliad, for example, most likely relates myths passed down from the Trojan War, a known Late Bronze Age event.\nThe Greeks were aided and abetted in their myth-making by the oracles in which they typically devoutly believed. When asked a question, an oracle never gave a direct answer, but spoke in allegories with \"hidden meanings\" and \"ambiguities,\" said Plutarch, priest of Apollo and historian. It was then incumbent on the inquiring party to interpret them. As the prophecy was regarded as the true word of divinity, the actual meaning, if it could be known, must be historical truth. Believing this principle to be true, many of the best historians spent time trying to intepret oracular myths as actual circumstances.\nSome Temple of Apollo appears in the Homeric Literature. In the Iliad, Achilles would not accept Agamemnon's peace offering even if it included all the wealth in the \"stone floor\" of \"rocky Pytho\" (I 404). In the Odyssey (\u03b8 79) Agamemnon crosses a \"stone floor\" to receive a prophecy from Apollo in Pytho, the first known of proto-history. Hesiod also refers to Pytho \"in the hollows of Parnassus\" (Theogony 498). These references imply that the earliest known date of the oracle's existence is the 8th century BC, the probable date of composition of the Homeric works. Earlier times of existence cannot be excluded if the written poems are adaptations of earlier oral ones.\nBeyond these proto-historic tidbits the main myths of Delphi are given in three literary loci. H.W Parke, the Delphi scholar, complained that they are self-contradictory, thus unconsciously falling into the Plutarchian epistemology, that they reflect some common, objective historic reality against which the accounts can be compared. Missing is the reality, nor can it be assumed ever to have existed. There is no Apollo, no Zeus, no Hera, and certainly never was a great, dragon-like Python. Not having existed, he did not rot. The myths are pure, Plutarchian figures of speech. meant to be aetiologies of some oracular tradition.\nHomeric Hymn 3, \"To Apollo,\" is the oldest of the three loci, dating to the 7th century BC (estimate). Apollo travels about after his birth on Delos seeking a place for an oracle. He is advised by Telephus to choose Crissa \"below the glade of Parnassus,\" which he does, and has a temple built. Killing the she-dragon that guards the spring, he leaves her to rot, from which the name Pytho, \"rotten.\" Subsequently, some Cretans from Knossos sail up on a mission to reconnoitre Pylos. Changing into a dolphin, Apollo casts himself on deck. The Cretans do not dare to remove him but sail on. Apollo guides the ship around Greece, ending back at Crisa, where the ship grounds. Apollo enters his shrine, with the Cretans to be its priests, worshipping him as Delphineus, \"of the dolphin.\"\nZeus determined the site of Delphi when he sought to find the centre of his \"Grandmother Earth\" (Gaia). He sent two eagles flying from the eastern and western extremities, and the path of the eagles crossed over Delphi where the omphalos, or navel of Gaia was found.\nAccording to Aeschylus in the prologue of the \"Eumenides\", the oracle had origins in prehistoric times and the worship of Gaia, a view echoed by H.W. Parke.\nOne tale of the sanctuary's discovery states that a goatherd, who grazed his flocks on Parnassus, one day observed his goats playing with great agility upon nearing a chasm in the rock; the goatherd noticing this held his head over the chasm causing the fumes to go to his brain; throwing him into a strange trance.\nThe Homeric Hymn to Delphic Apollo recalled that the ancient name of this site had been \"Krisa\".\nOthers relate that it was named Pytho (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce) and that Pythia, the priestess serving as the oracle, was chosen from their ranks by a group of priestesses who officiated at the temple. Apollo was said to have slain Python, a \"drako\" a serpent or a dragon who lived there and protected the navel of the Earth. \"Python\" (derived from the verb \u03c0\u03cd\u03b8\u03c9 (\"pyth\u014d\"), \"to rot\") is claimed by some to be the original name of the site in recognition of Python which Apollo defeated.\nThe name \"Delphi\" comes from the same root as \u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03cd\u03c2 \"delphys\", \"womb\" and may indicate archaic veneration of Gaia at the site.\nApollo is connected with the site by his epithet \u0394\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \"Delphinios\", \"the Delphinian\". The epithet is connected with dolphins (Greek \u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03af\u03c2,-\u1fd6\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) in the Homeric \"Hymn to Apollo\" (line 400), recounting the legend of how Apollo first came to Delphi in the shape of a dolphin, carrying Cretan priests on his back. The Homeric name of the oracle is \"Pytho\" (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce). Another legend held that Apollo walked to Delphi from the north and stopped at Tempe, a city in Thessaly, to pick laurel (also known as bay tree) which he considered to be a sacred plant. In commemoration of this legend, the winners at the Pythian Games received a wreath of laurel picked in the temple.\nOracle of Delphi.\nThe prophetic process.\nDelphi is perhaps best known for its oracle, the Pythia, or sibyl, the duty priestess prophecying from the tripod in the sunken adyton of the Temple of Apollo. Apollo spoke through his oracle. She had to be an older woman of blameless life chosen from among the peasants of the area. Alone in an enclosed inner sanctum (Ancient Greek \"adyton\" \u2013 \"do not enter\") she sat on a tripod seat over an opening in the earth (the \"chasm\"). According to legend, when Apollo slew Python its body fell into this fissure and fumes arose from its decomposing body. Intoxicated by the vapours, the sibyl would fall into a trance, allowing Apollo to possess her spirit. In this state she prophesied. The oracle could not be consulted during the winter months, for this was traditionally the time when Apollo would live among the Hyperboreans. Dionysus would inhabit the temple during his absence.\nThe time to consult pythia for an oracle during the year is determined from astronomical and geological grounds related to the constellations of Lyra and Cygnus but the hydrocarbon vapours emitted from the chasm. Similar practice was followed in other Apollo oracles too.\nWhile in a trance the Pythia \"raved\" \u2013 probably a form of ecstatic speech \u2013 and her ravings were \"translated\" by the priests of the temple into elegant hexameters. It has been speculated that the ancient writers, including Plutarch who had worked as a priest at Delphi, were correct in attributing the oracular effects to the sweet-smelling \"pneuma\" (Ancient Greek for breath, wind or vapour) escaping from the chasm in the rock. That exhalation could have been high in the known anaesthetic and sweet-smelling ethylene or other hydrocarbons such as ethane known to produce violent trances. Though this theory remains debatable the authors put up a detailed answer to their critics.\nAncient sources describe the priestess using \u201claurel\u201d to inspire her prophecies. Several alternative plant candidates have been suggested including Cannabis, Hyoscyamus, Rhododendron and Oleander. Harissis claims that a review of contemporary toxicological literature indicates that oleander causes symptoms similar to those shown by the Pythia, and his study of ancient texts shows that oleander was often included under the term \"laurel\". The Pythia may have chewed oleander leaves and inhaled their smoke prior to her oracular pronouncements and sometimes dying from the toxicity. The toxic substances of oleander resulted in symptoms similar to those of epilepsy, the \u201csacred disease,\u201d which may have been seen as the possession of the Pythia by the spirit of Apollo.\nThe Delphic oracle exerted considerable influence throughout the Greek world, and she was consulted before all major undertakings including wars and the founding of colonies. She also was respected by the Greek-influenced countries around the periphery of the Greek world, such as Lydia, Caria, and even Egypt.\nThe oracle was also known to the early Romans. Rome's seventh and last king, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, after witnessing a snake near his palace, sent a delegation including two of his sons to consult the oracle.\nIn 83 BCE a Thracian tribe raided Delphi, burned the temple, plundered the sanctuary and stole the \"unquenchable fire\" from the altar. During the raid, part of the temple roof collapsed. The same year, the temple was severely damaged by an earthquake, thus it fell into decay and the surrounding area became impoverished. The sparse local population led to difficulties in filling the posts required. The oracle's credibility waned due to doubtful predictions.\nThe oracle flourished again in the second century CE during the rule of emperor Hadrian, who is believed to have visited the oracle twice and offered complete autonomy to the city.\nBy the 4th century, Delphi had acquired the status of a city. \nDespite the rise of Christianity across the Roman Empire, the oracle remained a religious centre throughout the 4th century, and the Pythian Games continued to be held at least until 424 CE; however, the decline continued. The attempt of Emperor Julian to revive polytheism did not survive his reign. Excavations have revealed a large three-aisled basilica in the city, as well as traces of a church building in the sanctuary's gymnasium. The site was abandoned in the 6th or 7th centuries, although a single bishop of Delphi is attested in an episcopal list of the late 8th and early 9th centuries.\nReligious significance of the oracle.\nDelphi became the site of a major temple to Phoebus Apollo, as well as the Pythian Games and the prehistoric oracle. Even in Roman times, hundreds of votive statues remained, described by Pliny the Younger and seen by Pausanias. Carved into the temple were three phrases: (\"gn\u014dthi seaut\u00f3n\" = \"know thyself\") and (\"m\u0113d\u00e9n \u00e1gan\" = \"nothing in excess\"), and (\"eng\u00fda p\u00e1ra d'at\u0113\" = \"make a pledge and mischief is nigh\"), In antiquity, the origin of these phrases was attributed to one or more of the Seven Sages of Greece by authors such as Plato and Pausanias. Additionally, according to Plutarch's essay on the meaning of the \"E at Delphi\"\u2014the only literary source for the inscription\u2014there was also inscribed at the temple a large letter E. Among other things epsilon signifies the number 5. However, ancient as well as modern scholars have doubted the legitimacy of such inscriptions. According to one pair of scholars, \"The actual authorship of the three maxims set up on the Delphian temple may be left uncertain. Most likely they were popular proverbs, which tended later to be attributed to particular sages.\"\nAccording to the Homeric hymn to the Pythian Apollo, Apollo shot his first arrow as an infant which effectively slew the serpent Pytho, the son of Gaia, who guarded the spot. To atone the murder of Gaia's son, Apollo was forced to fly and spend eight years in menial service before he could return forgiven. A festival, the Septeria, was held every year, at which the whole story was represented: the slaying of the serpent, and the flight, atonement, and return of the god.\nThe Pythian Games took place every four years to commemorate Apollo's victory. Another regular Delphi festival was the \"Theophania\" (\u0398\u03b5\u03bf\u03c6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1), an annual festival in spring celebrating the return of Apollo from his winter quarters in Hyperborea. The culmination of the festival was a display of an image of the gods, usually hidden in the sanctuary, to worshippers.\nThe \"theoxenia\" was held each summer, centred on a feast for \"gods and ambassadors from other states.\" Myths indicate that Apollo killed the chthonic serpent Python guarding the Castalian Spring and named his priestess Pythia after her. Python, who had been sent by Hera, had attempted to prevent Leto, while she was pregnant with Apollo and Artemis, from giving birth.\nThis spring flowed toward the temple but disappeared beneath, creating a cleft which emitted chemical vapors that purportedly caused the oracle at Delphi to reveal her prophecies. Apollo killed Python but had to be punished for it, since he was a child of Gaia. The shrine dedicated to Apollo was originally dedicated to Gaia and shared with Poseidon. The name Pythia remained as the title of the Delphic oracle.\nErwin Rohde wrote that the Python was an earth spirit, who was conquered by Apollo, and buried under the omphalos, and that it is a case of one deity setting up a temple on the grave of another. Another view holds that Apollo was a fairly recent addition to the Greek pantheon coming originally from Lydia. The Etruscans coming from northern Anatolia also worshipped Apollo, and it may be that he was originally identical with Mesopotamian Aplu, an Akkadian title meaning \"son\", originally given to the plague God Nergal, son of Enlil. Apollo Smintheus (Greek ), the mouse killer eliminates mice, a primary cause of disease, hence he promotes preventive medicine.\nHistory.\nOccupation of the site at Delphi can be traced back to the Neolithic period with extensive occupation and use beginning in the Mycenaean period (1600\u20131100 BC). In Mycenaean times Krissa was a major Greek land and sea power, perhaps one of the first in Greece, if the Early Helladic date of Kirra is to be believed. The ancient sources indicate that the previous name of the Gulf of Corinth was the \"Krisaean Gulf.\" Like Krisa, Corinth was a Dorian state, and Gulf of Corinth was a Dorian lake, so to speak, especially since the migration of Dorians into the Peloponnesus starting about 1000 BC. Krisa's power was broken finally by the recovered Aeolic and Attic-Ionic speaking states of southern Greece over the issue of access to Delphi. Control of it was assumed by the Amphictyonic League, an organization of states with an interest in Delphi, in the early classical period. Krisa was destroyed for its arrogance. The gulf was given Corinth's name. Corinth by then was like the Ionic states: ornate and innovative, not like the spartan style of the Doric.\nAncient Delphi.\nEarlier myths include traditions that Pythia, or the Delphic oracle, already was the site of an important oracle in the pre-classical Greek world (as early as 1400\u00a0BC) and, rededicated from about 800\u00a0BC, when it served as the major site during classical times for the worship of the god Apollo.\nDelphi was since ancient times a place of worship for Gaia, the mother goddess connected with fertility. The town started to gain pan-Hellenic relevance as both a shrine and an oracle in the 7th century BC. Initially under the control of Phocaean settlers based in nearby Kirra (currently Itea), Delphi was reclaimed by the Athenians during the First Sacred War (597\u2013585 BC). The conflict resulted in the consolidation of the Amphictyonic League, which had both a military and a religious function revolving around the protection of the Temple of Apollo. This shrine was destroyed by fire in 548 BC and then fell under the control of the Alcmaeonids banned from Athens. In 449\u2013448 BC, the Second Sacred War (fought in the wider context of the First Peloponnesian War between the Peloponnesian League led by Sparta and the Delian-Attic League led by Athens) resulted in the Phocians gaining control of Delphi and the management of the Pythian Games.\nIn 356 BC the Phocians under Philomelos captured and sacked Delphi, leading to the Third Sacred War (356\u2013346 BC), which ended with the defeat of the former and the rise of Macedon under the reign of Philip II. This led to the Fourth Sacred War (339 BC), which culminated in the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC) and the establishment of Macedonian rule over Greece.\nIn Delphi, Macedonian rule was superseded by the Aetolians in 279 BC, when a Gallic invasion was repelled, and by the Romans in 191 BC. The site was sacked by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 86 BC, during the Mithridatic Wars, and by Nero in 66 AD. Although subsequent Roman emperors of the Flavian dynasty contributed towards to the restoration of the site, it gradually lost importance. In the course of the 3rd century mystery cults became more popular than the traditional Greek pantheon. Christianity, which started as yet one more mystery cult, soon gained ground, and this eventually resulted in the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire. The anti-pagan legislation of the Flavian dynasty deprived ancient sanctuaries of their assets. The emperor Julian attempted to reverse this religious climate, yet his \"pagan revival\" was particularly short-lived. When the doctor Oreibasius visited the oracle of Delphi, in order to question the fate of paganism, he received a pessimistic answer:\n[Tell the king that the flute has fallen to the ground. Phoebus does not have a home any more, neither an oracular laurel, nor a speaking fountain, because the talking water has dried out.]\nIt was shut down during the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire by Theodosius I in 381 AD.\nAmphictyonic Council.\nThe Amphictyonic Council was a council of representatives from six Greek tribes that controlled Delphi and also the quadrennial Pythian Games. They met biannually and came from Thessaly and central Greece. Over time, the town of Delphi gained more control of itself and the council lost much of its influence.\nThe sacred precinct in the Iron Age.\nExcavation at Delphi, which was a post-Mycenaean settlement of the late 9th\u00a0century, has uncovered artifacts increasing steadily in volume beginning with the last quarter of the 8th century\u00a0BC. Pottery and bronze as well as tripod dedications continue in a steady stream, in contrast to Olympia. Neither the range of objects nor the presence of prestigious dedications proves that Delphi was a focus of attention for a wide range of worshippers, but the large quantity of valuable goods, found in no other mainland sanctuary, encourages that view.\nApollo's sacred precinct in Delphi was a Panhellenic Sanctuary, where every four years, starting in 586\u00a0BC athletes from all over the Greek world competed in the Pythian Games, one of the four Panhellenic Games, precursors of the Modern Olympics. The victors at Delphi were presented with a laurel crown (\"stephanos\") which was ceremonially cut from a tree by a boy who re-enacted the slaying of the Python. (These competitions are also called stephantic games, after the crown.) Delphi was set apart from the other games sites because it hosted the mousikos agon, musical competitions.\nThese Pythian Games rank second among the four stephantic games chronologically and in importance. These games, though, were different from the games at Olympia in that they were not of such vast importance to the city of Delphi as the games at Olympia were to the area surrounding Olympia. Delphi would have been a renowned city regardless of whether it hosted these games; it had other attractions that led to it being labeled the \"omphalos\" (navel) of the earth, in other words, the centre of the world.\nIn the inner \"hestia\" (hearth) of the Temple of Apollo, an eternal flame burned. After the battle of Plataea, the Greek cities extinguished their fires and brought new fire from the hearth of Greece, at Delphi; in the foundation stories of several Greek colonies, the founding colonists were first dedicated at Delphi.\nAbandonment and rediscovery.\nThe Ottomans finalized their domination over Phocis and Delphi in about 1410CE. Delphi itself remained almost uninhabited for centuries. It seems that one of the first buildings of the early modern era was the monastery of the Dormition of Mary or of Panagia (the Mother of God) built above the ancient gymnasium at Delphi. It must have been towards the end of the 15th or in the 16th century that a settlement started forming there, which eventually ended up forming the village of Kastri.\nOttoman Delphi gradually began to be investigated. The first Westerner to describe the remains in Delphi was Ciriaco de' Pizzicolli (Cyriacus of Ancona), a 15th-century merchant turned diplomat and antiquarian. He visited Delphi in March 1436 and remained there for six days. He recorded all the visible archaeological remains based on Pausanias for identification. He described the stadium and the theatre at that date as well as some freestanding pieces of sculpture. He also recorded several inscriptions, most of which are now lost. His identifications however were not always correct: for example he described a round building he saw as the temple of Apollo while this was simply the base of the Argives' ex-voto. A severe earthquake in 1500 caused much damage.\nIn 1766 an English expedition funded by the Society of Dilettanti included the Oxford epigraphist Richard Chandler, the architect Nicholas Revett, and the painter William Pars. Their studies were published in 1769 under the title \"Ionian Antiquities\", followed by a collection of inscriptions, and two travel books, one about Asia Minor (1775), and one about Greece (1776). Apart from the antiquities, they also related some vivid descriptions of daily life in Kastri, such as the crude behaviour of the Turco-Albanians who guarded the mountain passes.\nIn 1805 Edward Dodwell visited Delphi, accompanied by the painter Simone Pomardi. Lord Byron visited in 1809, accompanied by his friend John Cam Hobhouse:\nYet there I've wandered by the vaulted rill;&lt;br&gt;\nYes! Sighed o'er Delphi's long deserted shrine, &lt;br&gt;\nwhere, save that feeble fountain, all is still.\nHe carved his name on the same column in the gymnasium as Lord Aberdeen, later Prime Minister, who had visited a few years before. Proper excavation did not start until the late 19th century (see \"Excavations\" section) after the village had moved.\nDelphi in later art.\nFrom the 16th century onward, woodcuts of Delphi began to appear in printed maps and books. The earliest depictions of Delphi were totally imaginary; for example, those created by Nikolaus Gerbel, who published in 1545 a text based on the map of Greece by N. Sofianos. The ancient sanctuary was depicted as a fortified city.\nThe first travelers with archaeological interests, apart from the precursor Cyriacus of Ancona, were the British George Wheler and the French Jacob Spon, who visited Greece in a joint expedition in 1675\u20131676. They published their impressions separately. In Wheler's \"Journey into Greece\", published in 1682, a sketch of the region of Delphi appeared, where the settlement of Kastri and some ruins were depicted. The illustrations in Spon's publication \"Voyage d'Italie, de Dalmatie, de Gr\u00e8ce et du Levant, 1678\" are considered original and groundbreaking.\nTravelers continued to visit Delphi throughout the 19th century and published their books which contained diaries, sketches, views of the site as well as pictures of coins. The illustrations often reflected the spirit of romanticism, as evident by the works of Otto Magnus von Stackelberg, where, apart from the landscapes (\"La Gr\u00e8ce. Vues pittoresques et topographiques\", Paris 1834) are depicted also human types (\"Costumes et usages des peuples de la Gr\u00e8ce moderne dessin\u00e9s sur les lieux\", Paris 1828). The philhellene painter W. Williams has comprised the landscape of Delphi in his themes (1829). Influential personalities such as F.Ch.-H.-L. Pouqueville, W.M. Leake, Chr. Wordsworth and Lord Byron are amongst the most important visitors of Delphi.\nAfter the foundation of the modern Greek state, the press became also interested in these travelers. Thus \"Ephemeris\" writes (17 March 1889):\nIn the \"Revues des Deux Mondes\" Paul Lefaivre published his memoirs from an excursion to Delphi. The French author relates in a charming style his adventures on the road, praising particularly the ability of an old woman to put back in place the dislocated arm of one of his foreign traveling companions, who had fallen off the horse. \"In Arachova the Greek type is preserved intact. The men are rather athletes than farmers, built for running and wrestling, particularly elegant and slender under their mountain gear.\" Only briefly does he refer to the antiquities of Delphi, but he refers to a pelasgian wall 80\u00a0meters long, \"on which innumerable inscriptions are carved, decrees, conventions, manumissions.\"\nGradually the first travelling guides appeared. The revolutionary \"pocket\" books invented by Karl Baedeker, accompanied by maps useful for visiting archaeological sites such as Delphi (1894) and the informed plans, the guides became practical and popular. The photographic lens revolutionized the way of depicting the landscape and the antiquities, particularly from 1893 onwards, when the systematic excavations of the French Archaeological School started. However, artists such as Vera Willoughby, continued to be inspired by the landscape.\nDelphic themes inspired several graphic artists. Besides the landscape, Pythia/Sibylla become an illustration subject even on Tarot cards. A famous example constitutes Michelangelo's Delphic Sibyl (1509), the 19th-century German engraving Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, as well as the recent ink on paper drawing \"The Oracle of Delphi\" (2013) by M. Lind.\nModern artists are inspired also by the Delphic Maxims. Examples of such works are displayed in the \"Sculpture park of the European Cultural Center of Delphi\" and in exhibitions taking place at the Archaeological Museum of Delphi.\nDelphi in later literature.\nDelphi inspired literature as well. In 1814 W. Haygarth, friend of Lord Byron, refers to Delphi in his work \"Greece, a Poem\". In 1888 Charles Marie Ren\u00e9 Leconte de Lisle published his lyric drama L\u2019Apollonide, accompanied by music by Franz Servais. More recent French authors used Delphi as a source of inspiration such as Yves Bonnefoy (Delphes du second jour) or Jean Sullivan (nickname of Joseph Lemarchand) in L'Obsession de Delphes (1967), but also Rob MacGregor's Indiana Jones and the Peril at Delphi (1991).\nThe presence of Delphi in Greek literature is very intense. Poets such as Kostis Palamas (The Delphic Hymn, 1894), Kostas Karyotakis (Delphic festival, 1927), Nikephoros Vrettakos (return from Delphi, 1957), Yannis Ritsos (Delphi, 1961\u201362) and Kiki Dimoula (Gas omphalos and Appropriate terrain 1988), to mention only the most renowned ones. Angelos Sikelianos wrote The Dedication (of the Delphic speech) (1927), the Delphic Hymn (1927) and the tragedy Sibylla (1940), whereas in the context of the Delphic idea and the Delphic festivals he published an essay titled \"The Delphic union\" (1930). The nobelist George Seferis wrote an essay under the title \"Delphi\", in the book \"Dokimes\".\nThe importance of Delphi for the Greeks is significant. The site has been recorded on the collective memory and have been expressed through tradition. Nikolaos Politis, the famous Greek ethnographer, in his Studies on the life and language of the Greek people - part A, offers two examples from Delphi:\nWhen Christ was born a priest of Apollo was sacrificing below the monastery of Panayia, on the road of Livadeia, on a site called Logari. Suddenly he abandoned the sacrifice and says to the people: \"in this moment was born the son of God, who will be very powerful, like Apollo, but then Apollo will beat him\". He didn't have time to finish his speech and a thunder came down and burnt him, opening the rock nearby into two. [p.\u00a099]\nThe Mylords are not Christians, because nobody ever saw them cross themselves. They originate from the old pagan inhabitants of Delphi who kept their property in castle called Adelphi, named after the two brother princes who built it. When Christ and his mother came to the site, and all people around converted to Christianity they thought that they should better leave; thus the Mylords left for the West and took all their belongings with them. The Mylords come here now and worship these stones. [p.\u00a059]"}
{"id": "7952", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7952", "title": "Digital Equipment Corporation", "text": "Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC ), using the trademark Digital, was a major American company in the computer industry from the 1960s to the 1990s. The company was co-founded by Ken Olsen and Harlan Anderson in 1957. Olsen was president until forced to resign in 1992, after the company had gone into precipitous decline.\nAlthough the company produced many different product lines over their history, they are best known for their work in the minicomputer market starting in the mid-1960s. The company produced a series of machines known as the PDP line, with the PDP-8 and PDP-11 being among the most successful minis of all time. Their success was only surpassed by another DEC product, the late-1970s VAX \"supermini\" systems that were designed to replace the PDP-11. Although a number of competitors had successfully competed with Digital through the 1970s, the VAX cemented the company's place as a leading vendor in the computer space.\nAs microcomputers improved in the late 1980s, especially with the introduction of RISC-based workstation machines, the performance niche of the minicomputer was rapidly eroded. By the early 1990s, the company was in turmoil as their mini sales collapsed and their attempts to address this by entering the high-end market with machines like the VAX 9000 were market failures. After several attempts to enter the workstation and file server market, the DEC Alpha product line began to make successful inroads in the mid-1990s, but was too late to save the company.\nDEC was acquired in June 1998 by Compaq in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. During the purchase, some parts of DEC were sold to other companies; the compiler business and the Hudson, Massachusetts facility, were sold to Intel. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with Hewlett-Packard (HP) in May 2002.\n, decades-old hardware (including PDP-11, VAX, and AlphaServer) is being emulated to allow legacy software to run on modern hardware; funding for this is planned to last at least until 2030.\nHistory.\nFrom 1957 until 1992, DEC's headquarters were located in a former wool mill in Maynard, Massachusetts. The headquarter buildings were vacated in 1993, renamed Clock Tower Place, and subsequently redeveloped as Mill &amp; Main Place, a 1.1 million square foot facility for offices and light industry.\nInitially focusing on the small end of the computer market allowed DEC to grow without its potential competitors making serious efforts to compete with them. Their PDP series of machines became popular in the 1960s, especially the PDP-8, widely considered to be the first successful minicomputer. Looking to simplify and update their line, DEC replaced most of their smaller machines with the PDP-11 in 1970, the year they became the third largest computer manufacturer after IBM and the UNIVAC Division of Sperry Rand. The rising corporation eventually sold over 600,000 PDP-11s.\nOriginally designed as a follow-on to the PDP-11, DEC's VAX-11 series was the first widely used 32-bit minicomputer, sometimes referred to as \"superminis\". These systems were able to compete in many roles with larger mainframe computers, such as the IBM System/370. The VAX was a best-seller, with over 400,000 sold, and its sales through the 1980s propelled DEC to become the second largest computer company in the industry. At its peak, it was the second largest employer in Massachusetts, after the state government.\nThe rapid rise of the business microcomputer in the late 1980s, and especially the introduction of powerful 32-bit systems in the 1990s, quickly eroded the value of DEC's systems. DEC's last major attempt to find a space in the rapidly changing market was the DEC Alpha 64-bit RISC instruction set architecture. DEC initially started work on Alpha as a way to re-implement their VAX series, but also employed it in a range of high-performance workstations. Although the Alpha processor family met both of these goals, and, for most of its lifetime, was the fastest processor family on the market, extremely high asking prices were outsold by lower priced workstation chips from Intel and IBM/Motorola.\nDEC was acquired in June 1998 by Compaq, in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with Hewlett-Packard (HP) in May 2002.\nProducts.\nBeyond DECsystem-10/20, PDP, VAX and Alpha, DEC was known for its work in communication subsystem designs, such as Ethernet, DNA (DIGITAL Network Architecture: predominantly DECnet products), DSA (Digital Storage Architecture: disks/tapes/controllers), and its \"dumb terminal\" subsystems including VT100 and DECserver products.\nResearch.\nDEC's Research Laboratories (or Research Labs, as they were commonly known) conducted DEC's corporate research. Some of them were continued in operation by Compaq and are still operated by Hewlett-Packard. The laboratories were:\nSome of the former employees of DEC's Research Labs or DEC's R&amp;D in general include:\nSome of the former employees of Digital Equipment Corp were responsible for developing DEC Alpha and StrongARM:\nSome of the work of the Research Labs was published in the \"Digital Technical Journal\", which was in published from 1985 until 1998.\nAccomplishments and legacy.\nDEC supported the ANSI standards, especially the ASCII character set, which survives in Unicode and the ISO 8859 character set family. DEC's own Multinational Character Set also had a large influence on ISO 8859-1 (Latin-1) and, by extension, Unicode.\nUser organizations.\nOriginally the users' group was called DECUS (Digital Equipment Computer User Society) during the 1960s to 1990s. When Compaq acquired DEC in 1998, the users group was renamed CUO, the Compaq Users' Organisation. When HP acquired Compaq in 2002, CUO became HP-Interex, although there are still DECUS groups in several countries. In the United States, the organization is represented by the Encompass organization; currently Connect.\nSeveral editions of the Small Computer Handbook were published by DEC, giving information about their PDP line of computers. The editions were:\nWeb sites with photos of their covers include:"}
{"id": "7954", "revid": "48198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7954", "title": "Dead Kennedys", "text": " \nDead Kennedys are an American punk rock band that formed in San Francisco, California, in 1978. The band was one of the defining punk bands during its initial eight-year run.\nDead Kennedys' lyrics were usually political in nature, satirizing establishment political figures (liberal and conservative) and authority in general, as well as popular culture and even the punk movement itself. During their initial incarnation between 1978 and 1986, they attracted considerable controversy for their provocative lyrics and artwork. Several stores refused to stock their recordings, provoking debate about censorship in rock music; in the mid-1980s, vocalist and primary lyricist Jello Biafra became an active campaigner against the Parents Music Resource Center. This culminated in an obscenity trial between 1985 and 1986, which resulted in a hung jury.\nThe group released a total of four studio albums and one EP before disbanding in 1986. Following the band's dissolution, Biafra continued to collaborate and record with other artists including D.O.A., NoMeansNo and his own bands Lard and the Guantanamo School of Medicine, as well as releasing several spoken word performances.\nIn 2000 (upheld on appeal in 2003), Biafra lost an acrimonious legal case initiated by his former Dead Kennedys bandmates over songwriting credits and unpaid royalties. In 2001, the band reformed without Biafra; various singers have since been recruited for vocal duties. Although Dead Kennedys have continued to perform live over the years, they have not released any new material since the release of their most recent studio album \"Bedtime for Democracy\" in 1986.\nHistory.\nFormation of the band (1978\u201379).\nDead Kennedys formed in June 1978 in San Francisco, California, when East Bay Ray (Raymond Pepperell) advertised for bandmates in the newspaper \"The Recycler\", after seeing a ska-punk show at Mabuhay Gardens in San Francisco. The original band lineup consisted of Jello Biafra (Eric Reed Boucher) on vocals, East Bay Ray on guitar, Klaus Flouride (Geoffrey Lyall) on bass, 6025 (Carlos Cadona) on rhythm guitar and Ted (Bruce Slesinger) on drums and percussion. This lineup recorded their first demos. Their first live show was on July 19, 1978 at Mabuhay Gardens in San Francisco, California. They were the opening act on a bill that included DV8 and Negative Trend with The Offs headlining.\nDead Kennedys played numerous shows at local venues afterwards. Due to the provocative name of the band, they sometimes played under pseudonyms, including \"The DK's\", \"The Sharks\", \"The Creamsicles\" and \"The Pink Twinkies\". \"San Francisco Chronicle\" columnist Herb Caen wrote in November 1978, \"Just when you think tastelessness has reached its nadir, along comes a punk rock group called 'The Dead Kennedys', which will play at Mabuhay Gardens on Nov. 22, the 15th anniversary of John F. Kennedy's assassination.\" Despite mounting protests, the owner of Mabuhay declared, \"I can't cancel them NOW\u2014there's a contract. Not, apparently, the kind of contract some people have in mind.\" However, despite popular belief, the name was not meant to insult the Kennedy family, but according to Ray, \"the assassinations were in much more poor taste than our band. We actually respect the Kennedy family. . . . When JFK was assassinated, when Martin Luther King was assassinated, when RFK was assassinated, the American Dream was assassinated. . . . Our name is actually homage to the American Dream.\u201d\n6025 left the band in March 1979 under somewhat unclear circumstances, generally considered to be musical differences. In June, the band released their first single, \"California \u00fcber alles\", on Biafra and East Bay Ray's independent label, Alternative Tentacles. The band followed with a poorly attended East Coast tour, being a new and fairly unknown band at the time, without a full album release.\n\"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\" (1980\u201381).\nIn early 1980, they recorded and released the single \"Holiday in Cambodia\". In June, the band recorded their debut album, \"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\", released in September of that year on the UK label Cherry Red. The album reached number 33 on the UK Albums Chart. Since its initial release, it has been re-released by several other labels, including IRS, Alternative Tentacles, and Cleopatra. The newest reissue-- the special 25th anniversary edition-- features the original artwork and a bonus 55-minute DVD documenting the making of the album as well as the band's early years.\nOn March 25, 1980, Dead Kennedys were invited to perform at the Bay Area Music Awards in an effort to give the event some \"new wave credibility\", in the words of the organizers. The day of the performance was spent practicing the song they were asked to play, the underground hit \"California \u00fcber alles\". The band became the talking point of the ceremony when after about 15 seconds into the song, Biafra stopped the band\u2014in a manner reminiscent of Elvis Costello's \"Saturday Night Live\" appearance\u2014and said, \"Hold it! We've gotta prove that we're adults now. We're not a punk rock band, we're a new wave band.\" The band, all wearing white shirts with a big, black S painted on the front, pulled black ties from around the backs of their necks to form a dollar sign, then started playing a new song titled \"Pull My Strings\", a barbed, satirical attack on the ethics of the mainstream music industry, which contained the lyrics, \"Is my cock big enough, is my brain small enough, for you to make me a star?\". The song also referenced The Knack's song \"My Sharona\". \"Pull My Strings\" was never recorded for a studio release, though the performance at the Bay Area Music Awards, which was the only time the song was ever performed, was released on the band's compilation album \"Give Me Convenience or Give Me Death\".\nIn January 1981, Ted announced that he wanted to leave to pursue a career in architecture and would help look for a replacement. He played his last concert in February 1981. His replacement was D.H. Peligro (Darren Henley). Around the same time, East Bay Ray had tried to pressure the rest of the band to sign to the major record label Polydor Records; Biafra stated that he was prepared to leave the group if the rest of the band wanted to sign to the label, though East Bay Ray asserts that he recommended against signing with Polydor. Polydor decided not to sign the band after they learned that Dead Kennedys' next single was to be entitled \"Too Drunk to Fuck\".\nWhen \"Too Drunk to Fuck\" came out in May 1981, the song caused much controversy in the UK as the BBC feared the single would reach the Top 30; this would require a mention of the song on \"Top of the Pops\". It was never played although it was called \"'Too Drunk' by the Kennedys\" by presenter Tony Blackburn.\n\"In God We Trust, Inc.\", \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\" and Alternative Tentacles Records (1981\u201385).\nAfter Peligro joined the band, the extended play \"In God We Trust, Inc.\" (1981) saw them move toward a more aggressive hardcore/thrash sound. In addition to the EP's controversial artwork depicting a gold Christ figure on a cross of dollar bills, the lyrics contained Biafra's most biting social and political commentary yet, and songs such as \"Moral Majority\", \"Nazi Punks Fuck Off!\" and \"We've Got a Bigger Problem Now\" placed Dead Kennedys as the spokesmen of social protest, while \"Dog Bite\", a cover version of \"Rawhide\" and various joke introductions showed a much more whimsical side. In 1982, they released their second studio album, \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\". The album's cover features a withered starving African child's hand being held and dwarfed by a white man's hand, a picture that had won the World Press Photo award in 1980, taken in Karamoja district in Uganda by Mike Wells.\nThe band's music had evolved considerably in a short time, moving away from hardcore formulae toward a more innovative jazz-informed style, featuring musicianship and dynamics far beyond other bands in the genre (thus effectively removing the music from that genre). By now the group had become a de facto political force, pitting itself against rising elements of American social and political life such as the religious right, Ronald Reagan and the idle rich. The band continued touring all over the United States, as well as Europe and Australia, and gained a large underground following. While they continued to play live shows during 1983 and 1984, they took a break from releasing new records to concentrate on the Alternative Tentacles record label, which would become synonymous with DIY alternative culture. The band continued to write and perform new material during this time, which would appear on their next album (some of these early performances can be seen in the \"DMPO's on Broadway\" video, originally released by Dirk Dirksen and later reissued on Rhino).\n\"Frankenchrist\" and obscenity trial (1985\u201386).\nThe release of the album \"Frankenchrist\" in 1985 showed the band had grown in musical proficiency and lyrical maturity. While there were still a number of loud/fast songs, much of the music featured an eclectic mix of instruments including trumpets and synthesizers. Around this time Klaus Flouride released the similarly experimental solo EP \"Cha Cha Cha With Mr. Flouride\". Lyrically, the band continued their trademark social commentary, with songs such as \"MTV Get Off The Air\" and \"Jock-O-Rama (Invasion of the Beef Patrol)\" poking fun at mainstream America.\nHowever, the controversy that erupted over H.R. Giger's \"Penis Landscape\", included as an insert with the album, dwarfed the notoriety of its music. The artwork caused a furor with the newly formed Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC). In December 1985 a teenage girl purchased the album at the Wherehouse Records store in Los Angeles County. The girl's mother wrote letters of complaint to the California Attorney General and to Los Angeles prosecutors. In 1986, members of the band, along with other parties involved in the distribution of \"Frankenchrist\", were charged criminally with distribution of harmful matter to minors. The store where the teen actually purchased the album was never named in the lawsuit. The criminal charges focused on an illustration by H.R. Giger, titled \"Work 219: Landscape XX\" (also known as \"Penis Landscape\"). Included as a poster with the album, \"Penis Landscape\" depicts nine copulating penises and vaginas.\nMembers of the band and others in the chain of distribution were charged with violating the California Penal Code on a misdemeanor charge carrying a maximum penalty of up to a year in county jail and a base fine of up to $2,000. Biafra says that during this time government agents invaded and searched his home. The prosecution tried to present the poster to the jury in isolation for consideration as obscene material, but Judge Susan Isacoff ruled that the poster must be considered along with the music and lyrics. The charges against three of the original defendants, Ruth Schwartz (owner of Mordam Records), Steve Boudreau (a distributor involved in supplying \"Frankenchrist\" to the Los Angeles Wherehouse store), and Salvatore Alberti (owner of the factory where the record was pressed), were dismissed for lack of evidence.\nIn August 1987, the case went to the jury with two remaining defendants: Jello Biafra and Michael Bonanno (former Alternative Tentacles label manager). However, the criminal trial ended with a hung jury, split 7 to 5 in favor of acquittal. District Attorneys Michael Guarino and Ira Riener made a motion for a retrial which was denied by Judge Isacoff, Superior Court Judge for the County of Los Angeles. The album, however, was banned from many record stores nationwide.\nAfter the break up of the band, Jello Biafra brought up the court case on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\". Biafra was on the show with Tipper Gore as part of a panel discussion on the issues of \"controversial music lyrics\" and censorship.\n\"Bedtime for Democracy\" and break-up (1986).\nIn addition to the obscenity lawsuit, the band became increasingly disillusioned with the underground scene as well. The hardcore scene, which had been a haven for free-thinking intellectuals and downtrodden nonconformists, was attracting a more violent audience that imposed an increasing level of brutality on other concertgoers and began to alienate many of the bands and individuals who had helped pioneer the movement in the early 1980s. In earlier years the band had criticized neo-Nazi skinheads for trying to ruin the punk scene, but just as big a problem was the popularity of increasingly macho hardcore bands, which brought the group (and their genre) an audience that had little to do with the ideas/ideals they stood for. In January 1986, frustrated and alienated from their own scene, Dead Kennedys decided to break up to pursue other interests and played their last concert on February 21. The band continued to work on songs, with Biafra penning songs such as \"Chickenshit Conformist\" and \"Anarchy for Sale\", which articulated their feelings about the \"dumbing down\" of punk rock.\nDuring the summer they recorded these songs for their final album, \"Bedtime for Democracy\", which was released in November. The artwork, depicting a defaced Statue of Liberty overrun with Nazis, media, opportunists, Klan members, corrupt government officials, and religious zombies, echoed the idea that neither America itself or the punk scene were safe havens any more for \"your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free\". The album contains a number of fast/short songs interspersed with jazz (\"D.M.S.O.\"), spoken word (\"A Commercial\") and psychedelia (\"Cesspools In Eden\"). The lyrical focus is more introspective and earnest (\"Where Do Ya Draw The Line?\"), with an anti-war, anti-violence (\"Rambozo The Clown\") bend, moving away from the violent imagery of their early records, while remaining as subversive as ever (\"I Spy\", \"D.M.S.O.\"). In December, the band announced their split. Biafra went on to speak about his political beliefs on numerous television shows and he released a number of spoken-word albums. Ray, Flouride, and Peligro also went on to solo careers.\nReforming of new band line-up.\nIn 2001, Ray, Peligro, and Flouride reformed the Dead Kennedys, with former Dr. Know singer Brandon Cruz replacing Biafra on vocals. The band played under the name \"DK Kennedys\" for a few concerts, but later reverted to \"Dead Kennedys\" permanently. They played across the continental United States, Europe, Asia, South America, and Russia. Brandon Cruz left the band in May 2003 and was replaced by Jeff Penalty. The band has released two live albums of archival performances on Manifesto Records: \"Mutiny on the Bay\", compiled from various live shows including a recording from their last show with Biafra in 1986, and \"Live at the Deaf Club\", a recording of a 1979 performance at the Deaf Club in San Francisco which was greeted with more enthusiasm.\nOn October 9, 2007, a best of album titled \"Milking the Sacred Cow\" was released. It includes two previously unreleased live versions of \"Soup Is Good Food\" and \"Jock-O-Rama\", originally found on \"Frankenchrist\".\nJeff Penalty left the band in March 2008 in what he describes as a \"not amicable split.\" In a statement released, Jeff said that, following a series of disputes, the band had secretly recruited a new singer and played a gig in his neighbourhood, although he also stated he was \"really proud of what we were able to accomplish with Dead Kennedys\". He was replaced by former Wynona Riders singer Ron \"Skip\" Greer. D.H. also left the band to \"take some personal time off\". He was replaced for a tour by Translator drummer Dave Scheff.\nBreak from touring.\nOn August 21, 2008, the band announced an extended break from touring due to the health-related issues of Flouride and Peligro. They stated their plans to collaborate on new projects. The band performed a gig in Santa Rosa, California in June 2009, with Peligro returning to the drum kit.\nIn August 2010, Dead Kennedys announced plans for a short East Coast tour. The lineup assembled for this tour contained East Bay Ray, Peligro, Greer, and bassist Greg Reeves replacing Flouride, who was taking \"personal time off\" from the band. The tour dates included performances in Philadelphia, New York City, Boston, Washington, D.C., Portland, Maine and Hawaii. The band has played a reworked version of their song \"MTV Get Off the Air\", re-titled \"MP3 Get Off the Web\", with lyrics criticizing music piracy during their October 16, 2010, concert at the Rock and Roll Hotel in Washington, D.C..\nBack on the road.\nDead Kennedys had world tours in 2013 and in 2014, the latter mostly in North American cities. In 2015 and 2016 they toured again, including South America, where they had not played since 2001.\nIn 2017, East Bay Ray revealed that the band and Jello Biafra had been approached by the Punk-oriented music festival Riot Fest about a potential reunion. While Ray and the rest of the band expressed interest in the concept, Biafra refused.\nOn April 26, 2019, the group released \"DK40\", a live compilation album celebrating 40 years since the band formed.\nConflicts between members.\nRoyalties lawsuit.\nIn the late 1990s, former band members discovered problems with the payment of royalties they had received from Alternative Tentacles. East Bay Ray, Klaus Flouride, and D. H. Peligro claimed that Jello Biafra had conspired to pay lower royalty rates. Although both sides agreed that the failure to pay these royalties was an accounting mistake, the other members were upset that Biafra failed to inform them of the mistake after he and his co-workers discovered it and additionally claimed he intended to use the money against them.\nA jury found Biafra and Alternative Tentacles \"guilty of malice, oppression and fraud\". Malice was defined for the jury as \"conduct which is intended to cause injury or despicable conduct which is carried with a willful and conscious disregard for the rights of others\". Biafra's appeal was denied; he had to pay the outstanding royalties and punitive damages, and was forced to hand over the rights to the majority of Dead Kennedys' back catalogue to the Decay Music partnership. The jury and judges also noted, in their words, that Biafra \"lacked credibility\" on the songwriting issue and found from evidence presented by both sides that the songwriting credits were due to the entire band.\nThis dispute was hotly contested by all concerned who felt passionately for their cause, and the case caused minor waves within punk circles. Biafra claims that East Bay Ray had long expressed displeasure with Alternative Tentacles and with the amount of money he received from them, thus the original incentive for the discovery of the back payments. It was found out that Alternative Tentacles was paying Dead Kennedys less per CD than all the other bands, including Biafra himself, and not informing his other bandmates, which was the fraud. Biafra accused the band of wanting to license the famous Dead Kennedys song \"Holiday in Cambodia\" for use in a Levi's jeans commercial, which the band denied. However, an instrumental loop from \"Holiday in Cambodia\" was part of the 1981 movie \"Neighbors,\" but wasn't included on the soundtrack.\nBiafra's former bandmates maintain that they sued because of Jello Biafra's deliberate withholding of money, though when pressed they have acknowledged that the payment was an accounting mistake, but insist that Biafra was wrong in failing to inform the band directly. Details about this issue remain scarce. The band also maintains that the Levi's story was completely fictitious and invented by Biafra to discredit them.\nDisputes over new commercial activities.\nMatters were stirred up even further when the three bandmates invited Jello Biafra to \"bury the hatchet\" in the form of a band reunion. Jello Biafra felt it was unprofessional because no one contacted him directly. In addition, Biafra was disdainful of the reunion, and having long expressed his disdain for nostalgia and rock reunion/oldies tours in particular, argued that the whole affair was motivated by greed.\nSeveral DVDs, re-issues, and live albums have been released since the departure of Biafra most recently on Manifesto Records. According to Biafra, the live albums are \"cash-ins\" on Dead Kennedys' name and his music. Biafra also accused the releases of the new live material of having poor sound quality. Furthermore, he has stated he is not receiving any royalties from the sale of any Manifesto Records releases. Consequently, he has discouraged fans from buying any Dead Kennedy reissues. The other band members denied Biafra's accusations regarding the live releases, and have defended the mixes as an effort of hard work. Biafra dismissed the new group as \"the world's greediest karaoke band.\" Nevertheless, in 2003, Klaus Flouride said of performances without the band's former frontman: \"There hasn't been a show yet that people didn't really like.\"\nBiafra further criticized them for advertising shows using his own image taken from the original 1980s incarnation of the band, which he labeled as false advertising. He attacked the reformed Dead Kennedys in a song called \"Those Dumb Punk Kids (Will Buy Anything)\", which appears on his second collaboration with sludge metal band the Melvins, \"Sieg Howdy!\"\nBiafra told an audience at a speaking gig in Trenton, New Jersey, that the remaining Dead Kennedys have licensed their single \"Too Drunk to Fuck\" to be used in a rape scene in a Robert Rodriguez movie. The reference is to a lounge cover of the song, recorded by the band Nouvelle Vague, played during a scene in the \"Planet Terror\" segment of \"Grindhouse\", although no rape takes place, and in fact the would-be rapist is killed by the would-be victim. The scene in \"Planet Terror\" has would-be rapist, \"Rapist No.\u00a01\" (Quentin Tarantino) order one-legged stripper \"Cherry Darlin\" (Rose McGowan) to get up off the floor and dance. At this point Tarantino hits play on a cassette recorder and Nouvelle Vague's cover of \"Too Drunk To Fuck\" plays. Biafra, disapproving of the situation, later wrote, \"This is their lowest point since Levi's... This goes against everything the Dead Kennedys stands for in spades... The terrified woman later 'wins' by killing Tarantino, but that excuse does not rescue this at all. I wrote every note of that song and this is not what it was meant for... Some people will do anything for money. I can't help but think back to how prudish Klaus Flouride was when he objected to H.R. Giger's painting on the \"Frankenchrist\" (sic) poster, saying he couldn't bear to show it to his parents. I'd sure love to be a fly on the wall when he tries to explain putting a song in a rape scene for money to his teenage daughter... The deal was pushed through by a new business manager the other three hired.\"\nThe reformed Dead Kennedys followed their court victory by releasing reissues of all Dead Kennedys albums (except \"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\", to which they did not have the rights until 2005), releasing several new archival concert DVDs, and licensing several songs to \"The Manchurian Candidate\" remake and the Tony Hawk Pro Skater video game. East Bay Ray claims he received a fax from Alternative Tentacles purporting Biafra approved the licensing for the game.\nThe band claims on their website that they still pay close attention to an anti-corporate ideology, despite performing on September 5, 2003 at a festival in Turkey that was sponsored by Coca-Cola, noting that they have since pulled out of a show in Los Angeles when they found that it was being sponsored by Coors. However, Biafra claims the previous licensing deals prove otherwise.\nLogo.\nThe original logo was created by Winston Smith. He later contributed artwork for the covers of \"In God We Trust, Inc.\", \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\", \"Frankenchrist\", \"Bedtime for Democracy\", \"Give Me Convenience or Give Me Death\", the back cover of the \"Kill the Poor\" single and the Alternative Tentacles logo. When asked about the \"DK\" logo in an interview, Jello Biafra explained, \"...I wanted to make sure it was something simple and easy to spray-paint so people would graffiti it all over the place, and then I showed it to Winston Smith. He played around with it, came back with a bunch of designs that had the circle and slightly 3-D looking letters and he had ones with different patterns behind it. I liked the one with bricks, but ultimately I thought simple red behind it was the boldest and the best.\"\nMusic and lyrics.\nDead Kennedys have been described as one of the first hardcore punk bands. They were noted for the harshness of their lyrics, which generally combined biting social satire while expressing a staunchly left-wing view of contemporary America. Unlike other leftist punk bands who use more direct sloganeering, Dead Kennedys' lyrics were often snide. For example, \"Holiday in Cambodia\" is a multi-layered satire targeting both yuppies and Cambodia's recently deposed Khmer Rouge regime.\nDead Kennedys have influenced multiple acts such as System of a Down, Green Day, Faith No More, Rage Against the Machine, Sepultura, Descendents, Bad Religion, Slayer, X, Minutemen, The Hives, Saves the Day and Screeching Weasel among others.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members"}
{"id": "7955", "revid": "12146322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7955", "title": "DNA", "text": "Deoxyribonucleic acid (; DNA) is a molecule composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix carrying genetic instructions for the development, functioning, growth and reproduction of all known organisms and many viruses. DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are nucleic acids. Alongside proteins, lipids and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides), nucleic acids are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.\nThe two DNA strands are known as polynucleotides as they are composed of simpler monomeric units called nucleotides. Each nucleotide is composed of one of four nitrogen-containing nucleobases (cytosine [C], guanine [G], adenine [A] or thymine [T]), a sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. The nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds (known as the phospho-diester linkage) between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. The nitrogenous bases of the two separate polynucleotide strands are bound together, according to base pairing rules (A with T and C with G), with hydrogen bonds to make double-stranded DNA. The complementary nitrogenous bases are divided into two groups, pyrimidines and purines. In DNA, the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine; the purines are adenine and guanine.\nBoth strands of double-stranded DNA store the same biological information. This information is replicated as and when the two strands separate. A large part of DNA (more than 98% for humans) is non-coding, meaning that these sections do not serve as patterns for protein sequences. The two strands of DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel. Attached to each sugar is one of four types of nucleobases (informally, \"bases\"). It is the sequence of these four nucleobases along the backbone that encodes genetic information. RNA strands are created using DNA strands as a template in a process called transcription, where DNA bases are exchanged for their corresponding bases except in the case of thymine (T), for which RNA substitutes uracil (U). Under the genetic code, these RNA strands specify the sequence of amino acids within proteins in a process called translation.\nWithin eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes. Before typical cell division, these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing a complete set of chromosomes for each daughter cell. Eukaryotic organisms (animals, plants, fungi and protists) store most of their DNA inside the cell nucleus as nuclear DNA, and some in the mitochondria as mitochondrial DNA or in chloroplasts as chloroplast DNA. In contrast, prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) store their DNA only in the cytoplasm, in circular chromosomes. Within eukaryotic chromosomes, chromatin proteins, such as histones, compact and organize DNA. These compacting structures guide the interactions between DNA and other proteins, helping control which parts of the DNA are transcribed.\nProperties.\nDNA is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides, each of which is usually symbolized by a single letter: either A, T, C, or G. Chargaff's rules state that DNA from any species of any organism should have a 1:1 protein stoichiometry ratio (base pair rule) of purine and pyrimidine bases (i.e., A+T=G+C) and, more specifically, that the amount of guanine should be equal to cytosine and the amount of adenine should be equal to thymine. The structure of DNA is dynamic along its length, being capable of coiling into tight loops and other shapes. In all species it is composed of two helical chains, bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. Both chains are coiled around the same axis, and have the same pitch of 34\u00a0angstroms (\u00c5) (3.4\u00a0nanometres). The pair of chains have a radius of 10\u00a0angstroms (1.0\u00a0nanometre). According to another study, when measured in a different solution, the DNA chain measured 22 to 26\u00a0angstroms wide (2.2 to 2.6\u00a0nanometres), and one nucleotide unit measured 3.3\u00a0\u00c5 (0.33\u00a0nm) long. Although each individual nucleotide is very small, a DNA polymer can be very large and may contain hundreds of millions of nucleotides, such as in chromosome 1. Chromosome 1 is the largest human chromosome with approximately 220 million base pairs, and would be 85\u00a0mm long if straightened.\nDNA does not usually exist as a single strand, but instead as a pair of strands that are held tightly together. These two long strands coil around each other, in the shape of a double helix. The nucleotide contains both a segment of the backbone of the molecule (which holds the chain together) and a nucleobase (which interacts with the other DNA strand in the helix). A nucleobase linked to a sugar is called a nucleoside, and a base linked to a sugar and to one or more phosphate groups is called a nucleotide. A biopolymer comprising multiple linked nucleotides (as in DNA) is called a polynucleotide.\nThe backbone of the DNA strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar groups. The sugar in DNA is 2-deoxyribose, which is a pentose (five-carbon) sugar. The sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These are known as the 3\u2032-end (three prime end), and 5\u2032-end (five prime end) carbons, the prime symbol being used to distinguish these carbon atoms from those of the base to which the deoxyribose forms a glycosidic bond. Therefore, any DNA strand normally has one end at which there is a phosphate group attached to the 5\u2032 carbon of a ribose (the 5\u2032 phosphoryl) and another end at which there is a free hydroxyl group attached to the 3\u2032 carbon of a ribose (the 3\u2032 hydroxyl). The orientation of the 3\u2032 and 5\u2032 carbons along the sugar-phosphate backbone confers directionality (sometimes called polarity) to each DNA strand. In a nucleic acid double helix, the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand: the strands are antiparallel. The asymmetric ends of DNA strands are said to have a directionality of five prime end (5\u2032 ), and three prime end (3\u2032), with the 5\u2032 end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3\u2032 end a terminal hydroxyl group. One major difference between DNA and RNA is the sugar, with the 2-deoxyribose in DNA being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in RNA.\nThe DNA double helix is stabilized primarily by two forces: hydrogen bonds between nucleotides and base-stacking interactions among aromatic nucleobases. The four bases found in DNA are adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) and thymine (T). These four bases are attached to the sugar-phosphate to form the complete nucleotide, as shown for adenosine monophosphate. Adenine pairs with thymine and guanine pairs with cytosine, forming A-T and G-C base pairs.\nNucleobase classification.\nThe nucleobases are classified into two types: the purines, A and G, which are fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds, and the pyrimidines, the six-membered rings C and T. A fifth pyrimidine nucleobase, uracil (U), usually takes the place of thymine in RNA and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring. In addition to RNA and DNA, many artificial nucleic acid analogues have been created to study the properties of nucleic acids, or for use in biotechnology.\nNon-canonical bases.\nModified bases occur in DNA. The first of these recognised was 5-methylcytosine, which was found in the genome of \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" in 1925. The reason for the presence of these noncanonical bases in bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) is to avoid the restriction enzymes present in bacteria. This enzyme system acts at least in part as a molecular immune system protecting bacteria from infection by viruses. Modifications of the bases cytosine and adenine, the more common and modified DNA bases, plays vital roles in the epigenetic control of gene expression in plants and animals.\nListing of non-canonical bases found in DNA.\nA number of non canonical bases are known to occur in DNA. Most of these are modifications of the canonical bases plus uracil.\nGrooves.\nTwin helical strands form the DNA backbone. Another double helix may be found tracing the spaces, or grooves, between the strands. These voids are adjacent to the base pairs and may provide a binding site. As the strands are not symmetrically located with respect to each other, the grooves are unequally sized. One groove, the major groove, is 22\u00a0angstroms (\u00c5) wide and the other, the minor groove, is 12\u00a0\u00c5 wide. The width of the major groove means that the edges of the bases are more accessible in the major groove than in the minor groove. As a result, proteins such as transcription factors that can bind to specific sequences in double-stranded DNA usually make contact with the sides of the bases exposed in the major groove. This situation varies in unusual conformations of DNA within the cell \"(see below)\", but the major and minor grooves are always named to reflect the differences in size that would be seen if the DNA is twisted back into the ordinary B form.\nBase pairing.\nIn a DNA double helix, each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand. This is called complementary base pairing. Purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines, with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydrogen bonds, and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds. This arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix is called a Watson-Crick base pair. DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low GC-content. A Hoogsteen base pair is a rare variation of base-pairing. As hydrogen bonds are not covalent, they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily. The two strands of DNA in a double helix can thus be pulled apart like a zipper, either by a mechanical force or high temperature. As a result of this base pair complementarity, all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a DNA helix is duplicated on each strand, which is vital in DNA replication. This reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of DNA in organisms.\nTop, a GC base pair with three hydrogen bonds. Bottom, an AT base pair with two hydrogen bonds. Non-covalent hydrogen bonds between the pairs are shown as dashed lines.\nssDNA vs. dsDNA.\nAs noted above, most DNA molecules are actually two polymer strands, bound together in a helical fashion by noncovalent bonds; this double-stranded (dsDNA) structure is maintained largely by the intrastrand base stacking interactions, which are strongest for G,C stacks. The two strands can come apart\u2014a process known as melting\u2014to form two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules. Melting occurs at high temperature, low salt and high pH (low pH also melts DNA, but since DNA is unstable due to acid depurination, low pH is rarely used).\nThe stability of the dsDNA form depends not only on the GC-content (% G,C basepairs) but also on sequence (since stacking is sequence specific) and also length (longer molecules are more stable). The stability can be measured in various ways; a common way is the \"melting temperature\", which is the temperature at which 50% of the ds molecules are converted to ss molecules; melting temperature is dependent on ionic strength and the concentration of DNA. As a result, it is both the percentage of GC base pairs and the overall length of a DNA double helix that determines the strength of the association between the two strands of DNA. Long DNA helices with a high GC-content have stronger-interacting strands, while short helices with high AT content have weaker-interacting strands. In biology, parts of the DNA double helix that need to separate easily, such as the TATAAT Pribnow box in some promoters, tend to have a high AT content, making the strands easier to pull apart.\nIn the laboratory, the strength of this interaction can be measured by finding the temperature necessary to break half of the hydrogen bonds, their melting temperature (also called \"Tm\" value). When all the base pairs in a DNA double helix melt, the strands separate and exist in solution as two entirely independent molecules. These single-stranded DNA molecules have no single common shape, but some conformations are more stable than others.\nSense and antisense.\nA DNA sequence is called a \"sense\" sequence if it is the same as that of a messenger RNA copy that is translated into protein. The sequence on the opposite strand is called the \"antisense\" sequence. Both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of DNA (i.e. both strands can contain both sense and antisense sequences). In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, antisense RNA sequences are produced, but the functions of these RNAs are not entirely clear. One proposal is that antisense RNAs are involved in regulating gene expression through RNA-RNA base pairing.\nA few DNA sequences in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and more in plasmids and viruses, blur the distinction between sense and antisense strands by having overlapping genes. In these cases, some DNA sequences do double duty, encoding one protein when read along one strand, and a second protein when read in the opposite direction along the other strand. In bacteria, this overlap may be involved in the regulation of gene transcription, while in viruses, overlapping genes increase the amount of information that can be encoded within the small viral genome.\nSupercoiling.\nDNA can be twisted like a rope in a process called DNA supercoiling. With DNA in its \"relaxed\" state, a strand usually circles the axis of the double helix once every 10.4 base pairs, but if the DNA is twisted the strands become more tightly or more loosely wound. If the DNA is twisted in the direction of the helix, this is positive supercoiling, and the bases are held more tightly together. If they are twisted in the opposite direction, this is negative supercoiling, and the bases come apart more easily. In nature, most DNA has slight negative supercoiling that is introduced by enzymes called topoisomerases. These enzymes are also needed to relieve the twisting stresses introduced into DNA strands during processes such as transcription and DNA replication.\nAlternative DNA structures.\nDNA exists in many possible conformations that include A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA forms, although, only B-DNA and Z-DNA have been directly observed in functional organisms. The conformation that DNA adopts depends on the hydration level, DNA sequence, the amount and direction of supercoiling, chemical modifications of the bases, the type and concentration of metal ions, and the presence of polyamines in solution.\nThe first published reports of A-DNA X-ray diffraction patterns\u2014and also B-DNA\u2014used analyses based on Patterson transforms that provided only a limited amount of structural information for oriented fibers of DNA. An alternative analysis was then proposed by Wilkins \"et al.\", in 1953, for the \"in vivo\" B-DNA X-ray diffraction-scattering patterns of highly hydrated DNA fibers in terms of squares of Bessel functions. In the same journal, James Watson and Francis Crick presented their molecular modeling analysis of the DNA X-ray diffraction patterns to suggest that the structure was a double-helix.\nAlthough the \"B-DNA form\" is most common under the conditions found in cells, it is not a well-defined conformation but a family of related DNA conformations that occur at the high hydration levels present in cells. Their corresponding X-ray diffraction and scattering patterns are characteristic of molecular paracrystals with a significant degree of disorder.\nCompared to B-DNA, the A-DNA form is a wider right-handed spiral, with a shallow, wide minor groove and a narrower, deeper major groove. The A form occurs under non-physiological conditions in partly dehydrated samples of DNA, while in the cell it may be produced in hybrid pairings of DNA and RNA strands, and in enzyme-DNA complexes. Segments of DNA where the bases have been chemically modified by methylation may undergo a larger change in conformation and adopt the Z form. Here, the strands turn about the helical axis in a left-handed spiral, the opposite of the more common B form. These unusual structures can be recognized by specific Z-DNA binding proteins and may be involved in the regulation of transcription. A 2020 study concluded that DNA turned right-handed due to ionization by cosmic rays.\nAlternative DNA chemistry.\nFor many years, exobiologists have proposed the existence of a shadow biosphere, a postulated microbial biosphere of Earth that uses radically different biochemical and molecular processes than currently known life. One of the proposals was the existence of lifeforms that use arsenic instead of phosphorus in DNA. A report in 2010 of the possibility in the bacterium GFAJ-1, was announced, though the research was disputed, and evidence suggests the bacterium actively prevents the incorporation of arsenic into the DNA backbone and other biomolecules.\nQuadruplex structures.\nAt the ends of the linear chromosomes are specialized regions of DNA called telomeres. The main function of these regions is to allow the cell to replicate chromosome ends using the enzyme telomerase, as the enzymes that normally replicate DNA cannot copy the extreme 3\u2032 ends of chromosomes. These specialized chromosome caps also help protect the DNA ends, and stop the DNA repair systems in the cell from treating them as damage to be corrected. In human cells, telomeres are usually lengths of single-stranded DNA containing several thousand repeats of a simple TTAGGG sequence.\nThese guanine-rich sequences may stabilize chromosome ends by forming structures of stacked sets of four-base units, rather than the usual base pairs found in other DNA molecules. Here, four guanine bases, known as a guanine tetrad, form a flat plate. These flat four-base units then stack on top of each other to form a stable G-quadruplex structure. These structures are stabilized by hydrogen bonding between the edges of the bases and chelation of a metal ion in the centre of each four-base unit. Other structures can also be formed, with the central set of four bases coming from either a single strand folded around the bases, or several different parallel strands, each contributing one base to the central structure.\nIn addition to these stacked structures, telomeres also form large loop structures called telomere loops, or T-loops. Here, the single-stranded DNA curls around in a long circle stabilized by telomere-binding proteins. At the very end of the T-loop, the single-stranded telomere DNA is held onto a region of double-stranded DNA by the telomere strand disrupting the double-helical DNA and base pairing to one of the two strands. This triple-stranded structure is called a displacement loop or D-loop.\nBranched DNA can form networks containing multiple branches.\nBranched DNA.\nIn DNA, fraying occurs when non-complementary regions exist at the end of an otherwise complementary double-strand of DNA. However, branched DNA can occur if a third strand of DNA is introduced and contains adjoining regions able to hybridize with the frayed regions of the pre-existing double-strand. Although the simplest example of branched DNA involves only three strands of DNA, complexes involving additional strands and multiple branches are also possible. Branched DNA can be used in nanotechnology to construct geometric shapes, see the section on uses in technology below.\nArtificial bases.\nSeveral artificial nucleobases have been synthesized, and successfully incorporated in the eight-base DNA analogue named Hachimoji DNA. Dubbed S, B, P, and Z, these artificial bases are capable of bonding with each other in a predictable way (S\u2013B and P\u2013Z), maintain the double helix structure of DNA, and be transcribed to RNA. Their existence could be seen as an indication that there is nothing special about the four natural nucleobases that evolved on Earth. On the other hand, DNA is tightly related to RNA which does not only act as a transcript of DNA but also performs as moleular machines many tasks in cells. For this purpose it has to fold into a structure. It has been shown that to allow to create all possible structures at least four bases are required for the corresponding RNA, while a higher number is also possible but this would be against the natural Principle of least effort.\nChemical modifications and altered DNA packaging.\nStructure of cytosine with and without the 5-methyl group. Deamination converts 5-methylcytosine into thymine.\nBase modifications and DNA packaging.\nThe expression of genes is influenced by how the DNA is packaged in chromosomes, in a structure called chromatin. Base modifications can be involved in packaging, with regions that have low or no gene expression usually containing high levels of methylation of cytosine bases. DNA packaging and its influence on gene expression can also occur by covalent modifications of the histone protein core around which DNA is wrapped in the chromatin structure or else by remodeling carried out by chromatin remodeling complexes (see Chromatin remodeling). There is, further, crosstalk between DNA methylation and histone modification, so they can coordinately affect chromatin and gene expression.\nFor one example, cytosine methylation produces 5-methylcytosine, which is important for X-inactivation of chromosomes. The average level of methylation varies between organisms\u2014the worm \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" lacks cytosine methylation, while vertebrates have higher levels, with up to 1% of their DNA containing 5-methylcytosine. Despite the importance of 5-methylcytosine, it can deaminate to leave a thymine base, so methylated cytosines are particularly prone to mutations. Other base modifications include adenine methylation in bacteria, the presence of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the brain, and the glycosylation of uracil to produce the \"J-base\" in kinetoplastids.\nDamage.\nDNA can be damaged by many sorts of mutagens, which change the DNA sequence. Mutagens include oxidizing agents, alkylating agents and also high-energy electromagnetic radiation such as ultraviolet light and X-rays. The type of DNA damage produced depends on the type of mutagen. For example, UV light can damage DNA by producing thymine dimers, which are cross-links between pyrimidine bases. On the other hand, oxidants such as free radicals or hydrogen peroxide produce multiple forms of damage, including base modifications, particularly of guanosine, and double-strand breaks. A typical human cell contains about 150,000 bases that have suffered oxidative damage. Of these oxidative lesions, the most dangerous are double-strand breaks, as these are difficult to repair and can produce point mutations, insertions, deletions from the DNA sequence, and chromosomal translocations. These mutations can cause cancer. Because of inherent limits in the DNA repair mechanisms, if humans lived long enough, they would all eventually develop cancer. DNA damages that are naturally occurring, due to normal cellular processes that produce reactive oxygen species, the hydrolytic activities of cellular water, etc., also occur frequently. Although most of these damages are repaired, in any cell some DNA damage may remain despite the action of repair processes. These remaining DNA damages accumulate with age in mammalian postmitotic tissues. This accumulation appears to be an important underlying cause of aging.\nMany mutagens fit into the space between two adjacent base pairs, this is called \"intercalation\". Most intercalators are aromatic and planar molecules; examples include ethidium bromide, acridines, daunomycin, and doxorubicin. For an intercalator to fit between base pairs, the bases must separate, distorting the DNA strands by unwinding of the double helix. This inhibits both transcription and DNA replication, causing toxicity and mutations. As a result, DNA intercalators may be carcinogens, and in the case of thalidomide, a teratogen. Others such as benzo[\"a\"]pyrene diol epoxide and aflatoxin form DNA adducts that induce errors in replication. Nevertheless, due to their ability to inhibit DNA transcription and replication, other similar toxins are also used in chemotherapy to inhibit rapidly growing cancer cells.\nBiological functions.\nDNA usually occurs as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes. The set of chromosomes in a cell makes up its genome; the human genome has approximately 3 billion base pairs of DNA arranged into 46 chromosomes. The information carried by DNA is held in the sequence of pieces of DNA called genes. Transmission of genetic information in genes is achieved via complementary base pairing. For example, in transcription, when a cell uses the information in a gene, the DNA sequence is copied into a complementary RNA sequence through the attraction between the DNA and the correct RNA nucleotides. Usually, this RNA copy is then used to make a matching protein sequence in a process called translation, which depends on the same interaction between RNA nucleotides. In alternative fashion, a cell may simply copy its genetic information in a process called DNA replication. The details of these functions are covered in other articles; here the focus is on the interactions between DNA and other molecules that mediate the function of the genome.\nGenes and genomes.\nGenomic DNA is tightly and orderly packed in the process called DNA condensation, to fit the small available volumes of the cell. In eukaryotes, DNA is located in the cell nucleus, with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid. The genetic information in a genome is held within genes, and the complete set of this information in an organism is called its genotype. A gene is a unit of heredity and is a region of DNA that influences a particular characteristic in an organism. Genes contain an open reading frame that can be transcribed, and regulatory sequences such as promoters and enhancers, which control transcription of the open reading frame.\nIn many species, only a small fraction of the total sequence of the genome encodes protein. For example, only about 1.5% of the human genome consists of protein-coding exons, with over 50% of human DNA consisting of non-coding repetitive sequences. The reasons for the presence of so much noncoding DNA in eukaryotic genomes and the extraordinary differences in genome size, or \"C-value\", among species, represent a long-standing puzzle known as the \"C-value enigma\". However, some DNA sequences that do not code protein may still encode functional non-coding RNA molecules, which are involved in the regulation of gene expression.\nSome noncoding DNA sequences play structural roles in chromosomes. Telomeres and centromeres typically contain few genes but are important for the function and stability of chromosomes. An abundant form of noncoding DNA in humans are pseudogenes, which are copies of genes that have been disabled by mutation. These sequences are usually just molecular fossils, although they can occasionally serve as raw genetic material for the creation of new genes through the process of gene duplication and divergence.\nTranscription and translation.\nA gene is a sequence of DNA that contains genetic information and can influence the phenotype of an organism. Within a gene, the sequence of bases along a DNA strand defines a messenger RNA sequence, which then defines one or more protein sequences. The relationship between the nucleotide sequences of genes and the amino-acid sequences of proteins is determined by the rules of translation, known collectively as the genetic code. The genetic code consists of three-letter 'words' called \"codons\" formed from a sequence of three nucleotides (e.g. ACT, CAG, TTT).\nIn transcription, the codons of a gene are copied into messenger RNA by RNA polymerase. This RNA copy is then decoded by a ribosome that reads the RNA sequence by base-pairing the messenger RNA to transfer RNA, which carries amino acids. Since there are 4 bases in 3-letter combinations, there are 64 possible codons (43\u00a0combinations). These encode the twenty standard amino acids, giving most amino acids more than one possible codon. There are also three 'stop' or 'nonsense' codons signifying the end of the coding region; these are the TAA, TGA, and TAG codons.\nReplication.\nCell division is essential for an organism to grow, but, when a cell divides, it must replicate the DNA in its genome so that the two daughter cells have the same genetic information as their parent. The double-stranded structure of DNA provides a simple mechanism for DNA replication. Here, the two strands are separated and then each strand's complementary DNA sequence is recreated by an enzyme called DNA polymerase. This enzyme makes the complementary strand by finding the correct base through complementary base pairing and bonding it onto the original strand. As DNA polymerases can only extend a DNA strand in a 5\u2032 to 3\u2032 direction, different mechanisms are used to copy the antiparallel strands of the double helix. In this way, the base on the old strand dictates which base appears on the new strand, and the cell ends up with a perfect copy of its DNA.\nExtracellular nucleic acids.\nNaked extracellular DNA (eDNA), most of it released by cell death, is nearly ubiquitous in the environment. Its concentration in soil may be as high as 2 \u03bcg/L, and its concentration in natural aquatic environments may be as high at 88 \u03bcg/L. Various possible functions have been proposed for eDNA: it may be involved in horizontal gene transfer; it may provide nutrients; and it may act as a buffer to recruit or titrate ions or antibiotics. Extracellular DNA acts as a functional extracellular matrix component in the biofilms of several bacterial species. It may act as a recognition factor to regulate the attachment and dispersal of specific cell types in the biofilm; it may contribute to biofilm formation; and it may contribute to the biofilm's physical strength and resistance to biological stress.\nCell-free fetal DNA is found in the blood of the mother, and can be sequenced to determine a great deal of information about the developing fetus.\nUnder the name of environmental DNA eDNA has seen increased use in the natural sciences as a survey tool for ecology, monitoring the movements and presence of species in water, air, or on land, and assessing an area's biodiversity.\nInteractions with proteins.\nAll the functions of DNA depend on interactions with proteins. These protein interactions can be non-specific, or the protein can bind specifically to a single DNA sequence. Enzymes can also bind to DNA and of these, the polymerases that copy the DNA base sequence in transcription and DNA replication are particularly important.\nDNA-binding proteins.\nStructural proteins that bind DNA are well-understood examples of non-specific DNA-protein interactions. Within chromosomes, DNA is held in complexes with structural proteins. These proteins organize the DNA into a compact structure called chromatin. In eukaryotes, this structure involves DNA binding to a complex of small basic proteins called histones, while in prokaryotes multiple types of proteins are involved. The histones form a disk-shaped complex called a nucleosome, which contains two complete turns of double-stranded DNA wrapped around its surface. These non-specific interactions are formed through basic residues in the histones, making ionic bonds to the acidic sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA, and are thus largely independent of the base sequence. Chemical modifications of these basic amino acid residues include methylation, phosphorylation, and acetylation. These chemical changes alter the strength of the interaction between the DNA and the histones, making the DNA more or less accessible to transcription factors and changing the rate of transcription. Other non-specific DNA-binding proteins in chromatin include the high-mobility group proteins, which bind to bent or distorted DNA. These proteins are important in bending arrays of nucleosomes and arranging them into the larger structures that make up chromosomes.\nA distinct group of DNA-binding proteins is the DNA-binding proteins that specifically bind single-stranded DNA. In humans, replication protein A is the best-understood member of this family and is used in processes where the double helix is separated, including DNA replication, recombination, and DNA repair. These binding proteins seem to stabilize single-stranded DNA and protect it from forming stem-loops or being degraded by nucleases.\nIn contrast, other proteins have evolved to bind to particular DNA sequences. The most intensively studied of these are the various transcription factors, which are proteins that regulate transcription. Each transcription factor binds to one particular set of DNA sequences and activates or inhibits the transcription of genes that have these sequences close to their promoters. The transcription factors do this in two ways. Firstly, they can bind the RNA polymerase responsible for transcription, either directly or through other mediator proteins; this locates the polymerase at the promoter and allows it to begin transcription. Alternatively, transcription factors can bind enzymes that modify the histones at the promoter. This changes the accessibility of the DNA template to the polymerase.\nAs these DNA targets can occur throughout an organism's genome, changes in the activity of one type of transcription factor can affect thousands of genes. Consequently, these proteins are often the targets of the signal transduction processes that control responses to environmental changes or cellular differentiation and development. The specificity of these transcription factors' interactions with DNA come from the proteins making multiple contacts to the edges of the DNA bases, allowing them to \"read\" the DNA sequence. Most of these base-interactions are made in the major groove, where the bases are most accessible.\nDNA-modifying enzymes.\nNucleases and ligases.\nNucleases are enzymes that cut DNA strands by catalyzing the hydrolysis of the phosphodiester bonds. Nucleases that hydrolyse nucleotides from the ends of DNA strands are called exonucleases, while endonucleases cut within strands. The most frequently used nucleases in molecular biology are the restriction endonucleases, which cut DNA at specific sequences. For instance, the EcoRV enzyme shown to the left recognizes the 6-base sequence 5\u2032-GATATC-3\u2032 and makes a cut at the horizontal line. In nature, these enzymes protect bacteria against phage infection by digesting the phage DNA when it enters the bacterial cell, acting as part of the restriction modification system. In technology, these sequence-specific nucleases are used in molecular cloning and DNA fingerprinting.\nEnzymes called DNA ligases can rejoin cut or broken DNA strands. Ligases are particularly important in lagging strand DNA replication, as they join together the short segments of DNA produced at the replication fork into a complete copy of the DNA template. They are also used in DNA repair and genetic recombination.\nTopoisomerases and helicases.\nTopoisomerases are enzymes with both nuclease and ligase activity. These proteins change the amount of supercoiling in DNA. Some of these enzymes work by cutting the DNA helix and allowing one section to rotate, thereby reducing its level of supercoiling; the enzyme then seals the DNA break. Other types of these enzymes are capable of cutting one DNA helix and then passing a second strand of DNA through this break, before rejoining the helix. Topoisomerases are required for many processes involving DNA, such as DNA replication and transcription.\nHelicases are proteins that are a type of molecular motor. They use the chemical energy in nucleoside triphosphates, predominantly adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to break hydrogen bonds between bases and unwind the DNA double helix into single strands. These enzymes are essential for most processes where enzymes need to access the DNA bases.\nPolymerases.\nPolymerases are enzymes that synthesize polynucleotide chains from nucleoside triphosphates. The sequence of their products is created based on existing polynucleotide chains\u2014which are called \"templates\". These enzymes function by repeatedly adding a nucleotide to the 3\u2032 hydroxyl group at the end of the growing polynucleotide chain. As a consequence, all polymerases work in a 5\u2032 to 3\u2032 direction. In the active site of these enzymes, the incoming nucleoside triphosphate base-pairs to the template: this allows polymerases to accurately synthesize the complementary strand of their template. Polymerases are classified according to the type of template that they use.\nIn DNA replication, DNA-dependent DNA polymerases make copies of DNA polynucleotide chains. To preserve biological information, it is essential that the sequence of bases in each copy are precisely complementary to the sequence of bases in the template strand. Many DNA polymerases have a proofreading activity. Here, the polymerase recognizes the occasional mistakes in the synthesis reaction by the lack of base pairing between the mismatched nucleotides. If a mismatch is detected, a 3\u2032 to 5\u2032 exonuclease activity is activated and the incorrect base removed. In most organisms, DNA polymerases function in a large complex called the replisome that contains multiple accessory subunits, such as the DNA clamp or helicases.\nRNA-dependent DNA polymerases are a specialized class of polymerases that copy the sequence of an RNA strand into DNA. They include reverse transcriptase, which is a viral enzyme involved in the infection of cells by retroviruses, and telomerase, which is required for the replication of telomeres. For example, HIV reverse transcriptase is an enzyme for AIDS virus replication. Telomerase is an unusual polymerase because it contains its own RNA template as part of its structure. It synthesizes telomeres at the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres prevent fusion of the ends of neighboring chromosomes and protect chromosome ends from damage.\nTranscription is carried out by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that copies the sequence of a DNA strand into RNA. To begin transcribing a gene, the RNA polymerase binds to a sequence of DNA called a promoter and separates the DNA strands. It then copies the gene sequence into a messenger RNA transcript until it reaches a region of DNA called the terminator, where it halts and detaches from the DNA. As with human DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, RNA polymerase II, the enzyme that transcribes most of the genes in the human genome, operates as part of a large protein complex with multiple regulatory and accessory subunits.\nGenetic recombination.\nStructure of the Holliday junction intermediate in genetic recombination. The four separate DNA strands are coloured red, blue, green and yellow.\nA DNA helix usually does not interact with other segments of DNA, and in human cells, the different chromosomes even occupy separate areas in the nucleus called \"chromosome territories\". This physical separation of different chromosomes is important for the ability of DNA to function as a stable repository for information, as one of the few times chromosomes interact is in chromosomal crossover which occurs during sexual reproduction, when genetic recombination occurs. Chromosomal crossover is when two DNA helices break, swap a section and then rejoin.\nRecombination allows chromosomes to exchange genetic information and produces new combinations of genes, which increases the efficiency of natural selection and can be important in the rapid evolution of new proteins. Genetic recombination can also be involved in DNA repair, particularly in the cell's response to double-strand breaks.\nThe most common form of chromosomal crossover is homologous recombination, where the two chromosomes involved share very similar sequences. Non-homologous recombination can be damaging to cells, as it can produce chromosomal translocations and genetic abnormalities. The recombination reaction is catalyzed by enzymes known as recombinases, such as RAD51. The first step in recombination is a double-stranded break caused by either an endonuclease or damage to the DNA. A series of steps catalyzed in part by the recombinase then leads to joining of the two helices by at least one Holliday junction, in which a segment of a single strand in each helix is annealed to the complementary strand in the other helix. The Holliday junction is a tetrahedral junction structure that can be moved along the pair of chromosomes, swapping one strand for another. The recombination reaction is then halted by cleavage of the junction and re-ligation of the released DNA. Only strands of like polarity exchange DNA during recombination. There are two types of cleavage: east-west cleavage and north\u2013south cleavage. The north\u2013south cleavage nicks both strands of DNA, while the east\u2013west cleavage has one strand of DNA intact. The formation of a Holliday junction during recombination makes it possible for genetic diversity, genes to exchange on chromosomes, and expression of wild-type viral genomes.\nEvolution.\nDNA contains the genetic information that allows all forms of life to function, grow and reproduce. However, it is unclear how long in the 4-billion-year history of life DNA has performed this function, as it has been proposed that the earliest forms of life may have used RNA as their genetic material. RNA may have acted as the central part of early cell metabolism as it can both transmit genetic information and carry out catalysis as part of ribozymes. This ancient RNA world where nucleic acid would have been used for both catalysis and genetics may have influenced the evolution of the current genetic code based on four nucleotide bases. This would occur, since the number of different bases in such an organism is a trade-off between a small number of bases increasing replication accuracy and a large number of bases increasing the catalytic efficiency of ribozymes. However, there is no direct evidence of ancient genetic systems, as recovery of DNA from most fossils is impossible because DNA survives in the environment for less than one million years, and slowly degrades into short fragments in solution. Claims for older DNA have been made, most notably a report of the isolation of a viable bacterium from a salt crystal 250 million years old, but these claims are controversial.\nBuilding blocks of DNA (adenine, guanine, and related organic molecules) may have been formed extraterrestrially in outer space. Complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine, and thymine, have also been formed in the laboratory under conditions mimicking those found in outer space, using starting chemicals, such as pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most carbon-rich chemical found in the universe, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar cosmic dust and gas clouds.\nIn February 2021, scientists reported, for the first time, the sequencing of DNA from animal remains, a mammoth in this instance over a million years old, the oldest DNA sequenced to date.\nUses in technology.\nGenetic engineering.\nMethods have been developed to purify DNA from organisms, such as phenol-chloroform extraction, and to manipulate it in the laboratory, such as restriction digests and the polymerase chain reaction. Modern biology and biochemistry make intensive use of these techniques in recombinant DNA technology. Recombinant DNA is a man-made DNA sequence that has been assembled from other DNA sequences. They can be transformed into organisms in the form of plasmids or in the appropriate format, by using a viral vector. The genetically modified organisms produced can be used to produce products such as recombinant proteins, used in medical research, or be grown in agriculture.\nDNA profiling.\nForensic scientists can use DNA in blood, semen, skin, saliva or hair found at a crime scene to identify a matching DNA of an individual, such as a perpetrator. This process is formally termed DNA profiling, also called \"DNA fingerprinting\". In DNA profiling, the lengths of variable sections of repetitive DNA, such as short tandem repeats and minisatellites, are compared between people. This method is usually an extremely reliable technique for identifying a matching DNA. However, identification can be complicated if the scene is contaminated with DNA from several people. DNA profiling was developed in 1984 by British geneticist Sir Alec Jeffreys, and first used in forensic science to convict Colin Pitchfork in the 1988 Enderby murders case.\nThe development of forensic science and the ability to now obtain genetic matching on minute samples of blood, skin, saliva, or hair has led to re-examining many cases. Evidence can now be uncovered that was scientifically impossible at the time of the original examination. Combined with the removal of the double jeopardy law in some places, this can allow cases to be reopened where prior trials have failed to produce sufficient evidence to convince a jury. People charged with serious crimes may be required to provide a sample of DNA for matching purposes. The most obvious defense to DNA matches obtained forensically is to claim that cross-contamination of evidence has occurred. This has resulted in meticulous strict handling procedures with new cases of serious crime.\nDNA profiling is also used successfully to positively identify victims of mass casualty incidents, bodies or body parts in serious accidents, and individual victims in mass war graves, via matching to family members.\nDNA profiling is also used in DNA paternity testing to determine if someone is the biological parent or grandparent of a child with the probability of parentage is typically 99.99% when the alleged parent is biologically related to the child. Normal DNA sequencing methods happen after birth, but there are new methods to test paternity while a mother is still pregnant.\nDNA enzymes or catalytic DNA.\nDeoxyribozymes, also called DNAzymes or catalytic DNA, were first discovered in 1994. They are mostly single stranded DNA sequences isolated from a large pool of random DNA sequences through a combinatorial approach called in vitro selection or systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX). DNAzymes catalyze variety of chemical reactions including RNA-DNA cleavage, RNA-DNA ligation, amino acids phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, carbon-carbon bond formation, etc. DNAzymes can enhance catalytic rate of chemical reactions up to 100,000,000,000-fold over the uncatalyzed reaction. The most extensively studied class of DNAzymes is RNA-cleaving types which have been used to detect different metal ions and designing therapeutic agents. Several metal-specific DNAzymes have been reported including the GR-5 DNAzyme (lead-specific), the CA1-3 DNAzymes (copper-specific), the 39E DNAzyme (uranyl-specific) and the NaA43 DNAzyme (sodium-specific). The NaA43 DNAzyme, which is reported to be more than 10,000-fold selective for sodium over other metal ions, was used to make a real-time sodium sensor in cells.\nBioinformatics.\nBioinformatics involves the development of techniques to store, data mine, search and manipulate biological data, including DNA nucleic acid sequence data. These have led to widely applied advances in computer science, especially string searching algorithms, machine learning, and database theory. String searching or matching algorithms, which find an occurrence of a sequence of letters inside a larger sequence of letters, were developed to search for specific sequences of nucleotides. The DNA sequence may be aligned with other DNA sequences to identify homologous sequences and locate the specific mutations that make them distinct. These techniques, especially multiple sequence alignment, are used in studying phylogenetic relationships and protein function. Data sets representing entire genomes' worth of DNA sequences, such as those produced by the Human Genome Project, are difficult to use without the annotations that identify the locations of genes and regulatory elements on each chromosome. Regions of DNA sequence that have the characteristic patterns associated with protein- or RNA-coding genes can be identified by gene finding algorithms, which allow researchers to predict the presence of particular gene products and their possible functions in an organism even before they have been isolated experimentally. Entire genomes may also be compared, which can shed light on the evolutionary history of particular organism and permit the examination of complex evolutionary events.\nDNA nanotechnology.\nDNA nanotechnology uses the unique molecular recognition properties of DNA and other nucleic acids to create self-assembling branched DNA complexes with useful properties. DNA is thus used as a structural material rather than as a carrier of biological information. This has led to the creation of two-dimensional periodic lattices (both tile-based and using the \"DNA origami\" method) and three-dimensional structures in the shapes of polyhedra. Nanomechanical devices and algorithmic self-assembly have also been demonstrated, and these DNA structures have been used to template the arrangement of other molecules such as gold nanoparticles and streptavidin proteins.\nHistory and anthropology.\nBecause DNA collects mutations over time, which are then inherited, it contains historical information, and, by comparing DNA sequences, geneticists can infer the evolutionary history of organisms, their phylogeny. This field of phylogenetics is a powerful tool in evolutionary biology. If DNA sequences within a species are compared, population geneticists can learn the history of particular populations. This can be used in studies ranging from ecological genetics to anthropology.\nInformation storage.\nDNA as a storage device for information has enormous potential since it has much higher storage density compared to electronic devices. However, high costs, slow read and write times (memory latency), and insufficient reliability has prevented its practical use.\nHistory.\nDNA was first isolated by the Swiss physician Friedrich Miescher who, in 1869, discovered a microscopic substance in the pus of discarded surgical bandages. As it resided in the nuclei of cells, he called it \"nuclein\". In 1878, Albrecht Kossel isolated the non-protein component of \"nuclein\", nucleic acid, and later isolated its five primary nucleobases.\nIn 1909, Phoebus Levene identified the base, sugar, and phosphate nucleotide unit of the RNA (then named \"yeast nucleic acid\"). In 1929, Levene identified deoxyribose sugar in \"thymus nucleic acid\" (DNA). Levene suggested that DNA consisted of a string of four nucleotide units linked together through the phosphate groups (\"tetranucleotide hypothesis\"). Levene thought the chain was short and the bases repeated in a fixed order.\nIn 1927, Nikolai Koltsov proposed that inherited traits would be inherited via a \"giant hereditary molecule\" made up of \"two mirror strands that would replicate in a semi-conservative fashion using each strand as a template\". In 1928, Frederick Griffith in his experiment discovered that traits of the \"smooth\" form of \"Pneumococcus\" could be transferred to the \"rough\" form of the same bacteria by mixing killed \"smooth\" bacteria with the live \"rough\" form. This system provided the first clear suggestion that DNA carries genetic information.\nIn 1933, while studying virgin sea urchin eggs, Jean Brachet suggested that DNA is found in the cell nucleus and that RNA is present exclusively in the cytoplasm. At the time, \"yeast nucleic acid\" (RNA) was thought to occur only in plants, while \"thymus nucleic acid\" (DNA) only in animals. The latter was thought to be a tetramer, with the function of buffering cellular pH.\nIn 1937, William Astbury produced the first X-ray diffraction patterns that showed that DNA had a regular structure.\nIn 1943, Oswald Avery, along with co-workers Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty, identified DNA as the transforming principle, supporting Griffith's suggestion (Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment). Late in 1951, Francis Crick started working with James Watson at the Cavendish Laboratory within the University of Cambridge. DNA's role in heredity was confirmed in 1952 when Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase in the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment showed that DNA is the genetic material of the enterobacteria phage T2.\n In May 1952, Raymond Gosling, a graduate student working under the supervision of Rosalind Franklin, took an X-ray diffraction image, labeled as \"Photo 51\", at high hydration levels of DNA. This photo was given to Watson and Crick by Maurice Wilkins and was critical to their obtaining the correct structure of DNA. Franklin told Crick and Watson that the backbones had to be on the outside. Before then, Linus Pauling, and Watson and Crick, had erroneous models with the chains inside and the bases pointing outwards. Her identification of the space group for DNA crystals revealed to Crick that the two DNA strands were antiparallel.\nIn February 1953, Linus Pauling and Robert Corey proposed a model for nucleic acids containing three intertwined chains, with the phosphates near the axis, and the bases on the outside. \nWatson and Crick completed their model, which is now accepted as the first correct model of the double-helix of DNA. On 28 February 1953 Crick interrupted patrons' lunchtime at The Eagle pub in Cambridge to announce that he and Watson had \"discovered the secret of life\".\nIn the 25 April 1953 issue of the journal \"Nature\", were published a series of five articles giving the Watson and Crick double-helix structure DNA, and evidence supporting it. The structure was reported in a letter titled \"MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF NUCLEIC ACIDS A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid\", in which they said, \"It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material.\" Followed by a letter from Franklin and Gosling, which was the first publication of their own X-ray diffraction data, and of their original analysis method. Then followed a letter by Wilkins, and two of his colleagues, which contained an analysis of \"in vivo\" B-DNA X-ray patterns, and supported the presence \"in vivo\" of the Watson and Crick structure.\nIn 1962, after Franklin's death, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins jointly received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Nobel Prizes are awarded only to living recipients. A debate continues about who should receive credit for the discovery.\nIn an influential presentation in 1957, Crick laid out the central dogma of molecular biology, which foretold the relationship between DNA, RNA, and proteins, and articulated the \"adaptor hypothesis\". Final confirmation of the replication mechanism that was implied by the double-helical structure followed in 1958 through the Meselson\u2013Stahl experiment. Further work by Crick and co-workers showed that the genetic code was based on non-overlapping triplets of bases, called codons, allowing Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W. Holley, and Marshall Warren Nirenberg to decipher the genetic code. These findings represent the birth of molecular biology."}
{"id": "7956", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7956", "title": "Dna", "text": ""}
{"id": "7957", "revid": "3940708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7957", "title": "Kennedy family", "text": "The Kennedy family is an American political family that has long been prominent in American politics, public service, entertainment, and business. The first Kennedy elected to public office was Patrick Joseph \"P. J.\" Kennedy in 1884, 35 years after the family's arrival from Ireland. He served in the Massachusetts state legislature from 1884 to 1895. At least one Kennedy family member served in federal elective office in every year from 1947, when P. J. Kennedy's grandson, John F. Kennedy, became a member of Congress from Massachusetts, to 2011, when P. J. Kennedy's great-grandson, Patrick J. Kennedy, retired as a member of Congress from Rhode Island, a span of 64 years.\nThe descendants of P. J.'s son, Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy include President John F. Kennedy (who also served in the United States Congress), U.S. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy (who later served in the U.S. Senate), four other members of the U.S. House of Representatives or Senate, two U.S. ambassadors, a lieutenant governor, three state legislators (one who went on to the U.S. House of Representatives), and one mayor.\nIn addition, Joseph Sr. and Rose's daughter, Eunice, founded the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (a part of the National Institutes of Health), and founded the Special Olympics. Eunice's daughter Maria Shriver served as First Lady of California. Other descendants of Joseph and Rose Kennedy have been active as lawyers, authors, and activists on behalf of those with physical and intellectual challenges.\nHistory.\nAccording to genealogist Brian Kennedy in his work \"JFK's Irish O'Kennedy Ancestors\", the Kennedys who would go on to play a significant role in the United States of America originated from the \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Fionn (one of the three Irish Gaelic \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide clans who ruled the kingdom of Ormond, along with the \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Donn and \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Ruadh). Their progenitor, Diarmaid \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Fionn, held Knigh Castle close to what is today Puckane, County Tipperary in 1546. From there, having lost out to the New English order in the Kingdom of Ireland, they ended up in Dunganstown, New Ross, County Wexford by 1740. Patrick Kennedy was born there in 1823.\nThe first Kennedys to reside in the United States were Patrick Kennedy (1823\u20131858) and Bridget Murphy (1824\u20131888), who sailed from Ireland to East Boston in 1849; Patrick worked in East Boston as a barrel maker, or cooper. Patrick and Bridget had five children: their youngest, Patrick Joseph \"P. J.\" Kennedy, went into business and served in the Massachusetts state legislature from 1884 to 1895.\nP. J. and Mary Augusta Hickey were the parents of four children. Their oldest was Joseph Patrick \"Joe\" Kennedy Sr., who amassed a fortune in banking and securities trading, which he further expanded by investing in other growing industries. Joseph Sr. was appointed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt as the first chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, chairman of the Maritime Commission, and U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom in the lead-up to World War II. He served on The Hoover Commission, officially named the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, from 1947 to 1949; the commission was appointed by President Harry Truman to recommend administrative changes in the federal government.\nContinued public service.\nJoseph P. Kennedy Sr. and Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald were the parents of nine children: Joseph Jr., John, Rose Marie (called Rosemary), Kathleen, Eunice, Patricia, Robert, Jean, and Edward (called Ted). John served as the 35th President of the United States, while Robert and Ted both became prominent senators. Every Kennedy elected to public office has served as a Democrat, while other members of the family have worked for the Democratic Party or held Cabinet posts in Democratic administrations. Many have attended Harvard University, and the family has contributed greatly to that university's John F. Kennedy School of Government.\nJoseph Sr. expected his eldest son, Joseph Jr., to go into politics and to ultimately be elected president. Joseph Jr. was elected as a delegate to the 1940 Democratic National Convention, and enlisted in the Navy after the U.S. entered World War II. Joseph Jr. was killed in 1944 when the bomber he was piloting exploded in flight. It then fell upon John, who had considered a career as a journalist \u2014 he had authored a book and did some reporting for Hearst Newspapers \u2014 to fulfill his father's desire to see the family involved in politics and government. After returning from Navy service, John served in the U.S. House of Representatives representing Massachusetts's 11th congressional district from 1947 to 1953, and then as U.S. Senator from Massachusetts until his election as President in 1960.\nDuring John's administration, Robert served as attorney general; his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver served as director of the new Peace Corps, and Ted was elected to the U.S. Senate, occupying his brother's former seat in Massachusetts until his death in 2009. Among the Kennedy administration's accomplishments: the Alliance for Progress, the Peace Corps, peaceful resolution to the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963, the 24th Amendment ending the poll tax, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The family was the subject of intense media coverage during and after the Kennedy presidency, often emphasizing their relative youth, allure, education, and future in politics. Ted served in the Senate with his brother Robert (1965\u20131968), and was serving in the Senate when his nephew, Joseph P. II (1987\u20131999), and son, Patrick J. (1995\u20132011), served in the U.S. House of Representatives.\nIn November 2012, Joseph P. Kennedy III, son of former Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II and grandson of the late Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 4th congressional district. In 2020, he lost the 2020 Senate primary election in Massachusetts to Ed Markey, the first Kennedy to ever lose an election in the state.\nKennedy curse.\nFamily incidents led Senator Ted Kennedy to wonder, in a televised statement about the Chappaquiddick incident in 1969, whether there really was a \"Kennedy curse.\" Some of the events endured by the Kennedy clan include: in 1941, Rosemary underwent a non-consensual lobotomy intended to prevent her from embarrassing the family with her violent mood swings, convulsions, and intellectual disability. The operation left her incapacitated for the rest of her life. Joseph Jr. died in 1944 when the Navy bomber he was piloting exploded in mid-flight. Kathleen died in a plane crash in France in 1948. John and Robert were assassinated, in 1963 and 1968 respectively. In 1964, Ted was nearly killed when his plane crashed in an apple orchard near Southampton, Massachusetts. (Legislative aide Edward Moss and the pilot were killed in the crash.) Ted was seriously injured and spent months in a hospital recovering from a severe back injury, a punctured lung, broken ribs and internal bleeding.\nIn later generations, Robert's son David died of a drug overdose in 1984; and son Michael died from injuries sustained in a skiing accident in 1997; John's son John Jr. died in a plane crash (along with his wife Carolyn and sister-in-law Lauren) off the coast of Martha's Vineyard in 1999; Kara Kennedy and Christopher Kennedy Lawford died of heart attacks, in 2011 and 2018 respectively; and Saoirse Kennedy Hill died of a drug overdose in 2019.\nIn April 2020, Robert's granddaughter Maeve Kennedy McKean, a former official in the Obama Administration, and her eight-year-old son, Gideon Joseph Kennedy McKean, went missing in Chesapeake Bay after embarking in a canoe to retrieve a ball. They were presumed dead after not being found within 26 hours. Maeve and Gideon's bodies have since been recovered.\nGovernment offices held.\nThere was a member of the Kennedy family in public office nearly continuously from 1946, when John F. Kennedy was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, until early 2011, when Patrick J. Kennedy left the House. The only exception in that time was the period between John F. Kennedy's resignation from the Senate on December 22, 1960 and his assumption of the office of President on January 20, 1961. In 2013 Joseph P. Kennedy III was elected U.S. Representative from Massachusetts and served until 2021.\nHeraldry.\nIn 1961, John F. Kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of Patrick Kennedy (1823\u20131858) from the Chief Herald of Ireland. The design of the arms (three gold closed helmets on a black field) strongly alludes to symbols in the coats of arms of the O'Kennedys of Ormonde and the FitzGeralds of Desmond, from whom the family is believed to be descended. The crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches, elements taken from the coat of arms of the United States of America and also symbolic of Kennedy and his brothers."}
{"id": "7958", "revid": "37543223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7958", "title": "Deflation (disambiguation)", "text": "Deflation refers to a decrease in the general price level, the opposite of inflation.\nDeflation may also refer to:"}
{"id": "7959", "revid": "36579482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7959", "title": "Democracy", "text": "Democracy (, \"d\u0113mokrati\u0101\", from \"d\u0113mos\" 'people' and \"kratos\" 'rule') is a form of government in which the people have the authority to choose their governing legislators. The decisions on who is considered part of the people and how authority is shared among or delegated by the people have changed over time and at different speeds in different countries, but they have included more and more of the inhabitants of all countries. Cornerstones include freedom of assembly and speech, inclusiveness and equality, membership, consent, voting, right to life and minority rights.\nThe \"notion\" of democracy has evolved over time considerably,\nand, generally, the two current types of democracy are direct and representative. In a direct democracy, the people directly deliberate and decide on legislation. In a representative democracy, the people elect representatives to deliberate and decide on legislation, such as in parliamentary or presidential democracy. Liquid democracy combines elements of these two basic types. \nPrevalent day-to-day decision making of democracies is the majority rule, though other decision making approaches like supermajority and consensus have been equally integral to democracies. They serve the crucial purpose of inclusiveness and broader legitimacy on sensitive issues, counterbalancing majoritarianism, and therefore mostly take precedence on a constitutional level.\nIn the common variant of liberal democracy, the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits the majority and protects the minority, usually through the enjoyment by all of certain individual rights, e.g. freedom of speech, or freedom of association. Besides these general types of democracy, there have been a wealth of further types (see below). \nDemocracy makes all forces struggle repeatedly to realize their interests and devolves power from groups of people to sets of rules. Western democracy, as distinct from that which existed in antiquity, is generally considered to have originated in city-states such as Classical Athens and the Roman Republic, where various schemes and degrees of enfranchisement of the free male population were observed before the form disappeared in the West at the beginning of late antiquity. The English word dates back to the 16th century, from the older Middle French and Middle Latin equivalents.\nAccording to American political scientist Larry Diamond, democracy consists of four key elements: a political system for choosing and replacing the government through free and fair elections; the active participation of the people, as citizens, in politics and civic life; protection of the human rights of all citizens; and a rule of law, in which the laws and procedures apply equally to all citizens. Todd Landman, nevertheless, draws our attention to the fact that democracy and human rights are two different concepts and that \"there must be greater specificity in the conceptualisation and operationalisation of democracy and human rights\".\nThe term appeared in the 5th century BC to denote the political systems then existing in Greek city-states, notably Athens, to mean \"rule of the people\", in contrast to aristocracy (, \"\"), meaning \"rule of an elite\". While theoretically, these definitions are in opposition, in practice the distinction has been blurred historically. The political system of Classical Athens, for example, granted democratic citizenship to free men and excluded slaves and women from political participation. In virtually all democratic governments throughout ancient and modern history, democratic citizenship consisted of an elite class, until full enfranchisement was won for all adult citizens in most modern democracies through the suffrage movements of the 19th and 20th centuries.\nDemocracy contrasts with forms of government where power is either held by an individual, as in an absolute monarchy, or where power is held by a small number of individuals, as in an oligarchy. Nevertheless, these oppositions, inherited from Greek philosophy, are now ambiguous because contemporary governments have mixed democratic, oligarchic and monarchic elements. Karl Popper defined democracy in contrast to dictatorship or tyranny, thus focusing on opportunities for the people to control their leaders and to oust them without the need for a revolution.\nCharacteristics.\nNo consensus exists on how to define democracy \u2013 indeed, one study found that at least 2,234 descriptions of democracy exist in the English language - but legal equality, political freedom and rule of law have been identified as important characteristics. These principles are reflected in all eligible citizens being equal before the law and having equal access to legislative processes. For example, in a representative democracy, every vote has equal weight, no unreasonable restrictions can apply to anyone seeking to become a representative, and the freedom of its eligible citizens is secured by legitimised rights and liberties which are typically protected by a constitution. Other uses of \"democracy\" include that of direct democracy.\nOne theory holds that democracy requires three fundamental principles: upward control (sovereignty residing at the lowest levels of authority), political equality, and social norms by which individuals and institutions only consider acceptable acts that reflect the first two principles of upward control and political equality.\nThe term \"democracy\" is sometimes used as shorthand for liberal democracy, which is a variant of representative democracy that may include elements such as political pluralism; equality before the law; the right to petition elected officials for redress of grievances; due process; civil liberties; human rights; and elements of civil society outside the government. Roger Scruton argues that democracy alone cannot provide personal and political freedom unless the institutions of civil society are also present.\nIn some countries, notably in the United Kingdom which originated the Westminster system, the dominant principle is that of parliamentary sovereignty, while maintaining judicial independence. In India, parliamentary sovereignty is subject to the Constitution of India which includes judicial review. Though the term \"democracy\" is typically used in the context of a political state, the principles also are applicable to private organisations.\nThere are many decision-making methods used in democracies, but majority rule is the dominant form. Without compensation, like legal protections of individual or group rights, political minorities can be oppressed by the \"tyranny of the majority\". Majority rule is a competitive approach, opposed to consensus democracy, creating the need that elections, and generally deliberation, are substantively and procedurally \"fair,\" i.e. just and equitable. In some countries, freedom of political expression, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and internet democracy are considered important to ensure that voters are well informed, enabling them to vote according to their own interests.\nIt has also been suggested that a basic feature of democracy is the capacity of all voters to participate freely and fully in the life of their society. With its emphasis on notions of social contract and the collective will of all the voters, democracy can also be characterised as a form of political collectivism because it is defined as a form of government in which all eligible citizens have an equal say in lawmaking.\nRepublics, though often associated with democracy because of the shared principle of rule by consent of the governed, are not necessarily democracies, as republicanism does not specify \"how\" the people are to rule.\nClassically the term \"republic\" encompassed both democracies and aristocracies. In a modern sense the republican form of government is a form of government without monarch. Because of this democracies can be republics or constitutional monarchies, such as the United Kingdom.\nHistory.\nHistorically, democracies and republics have been rare. Republican theorists linked democracy to small size: as political units grew in size, the likelihood increased that the government would turn despotic. At the same time, small political units were vulnerable to conquest. Montesquieu wrote, \"If a republic be small, it is destroyed by a foreign force; if it be large, it is ruined by an internal imperfection.\" According to Johns Hopkins University political scientist Daniel Deudney, the creation of the United States, with its large size and its system of checks and balances, was a solution to the dual problems of size.\nHistoric origins and proto-democratic societies.\nRetrospectively different polities, outside of declared democracies, have been described as proto-democratic (see History of democracy).\nOrigins.\nThe term \"democracy\" first appeared in ancient Greek political and philosophical thought in the city-state of Athens during classical antiquity. The word comes from \"demos\" '(common) people' and \"kratos\" 'strength'. Led by Cleisthenes, Athenians established what is generally held as the first democracy in 508\u2013507 BC. Cleisthenes is referred to as \"the father of Athenian democracy\".\nAthenian democracy took the form of a direct democracy, and it had two distinguishing features: the random selection of ordinary citizens to fill the few existing government administrative and judicial offices, and a legislative assembly consisting of all Athenian citizens. All eligible citizens were allowed to speak and vote in the assembly, which set the laws of the city state. However, Athenian citizenship excluded women, slaves, foreigners (\u03bc\u03ad\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03b9 / \"m\u00e9toikoi\"), and men under 20 years of age.\nOwning land was not a requirement for citizenship, but it did allow one to purchase land. The exclusion of large parts of the population from the citizen body is closely related to the ancient understanding of citizenship. In most of antiquity the benefit of citizenship was tied to the obligation to fight war campaigns.\nAthenian democracy was not only \"direct\" in the sense that decisions were made by the assembled people, but also the \"most direct\" in the sense that the people through the assembly, boule and courts of law controlled the entire political process and a large proportion of citizens were involved constantly in the public business. Even though the rights of the individual were not secured by the Athenian constitution in the modern sense (the ancient Greeks had no word for \"rights\"), the Athenians enjoyed their liberties not in opposition to the government but by living in a city that was not subject to another power and by not being subjects themselves to the rule of another person.\nRange voting appeared in Sparta as early as 700 BC. The Apella was an assembly of the people, held once a month, in which every male citizen of at least 30 years of age could participate. In the Apella, Spartans elected leaders and cast votes by range voting and shouting (the vote is then decided on how loudly the crowd shouts). Aristotle called this \"childish\", as compared with the stone voting ballots used by the Athenians. Sparta adopted it because of its simplicity, and to prevent any bias voting, buying, or cheating that was predominant in the early democratic elections.\nEven though the Roman Republic contributed significantly to many aspects of democracy, only a minority of Romans were citizens with votes in elections for representatives. The votes of the powerful were given more weight through a system of gerrymandering, so most high officials, including members of the Senate, came from a few wealthy and noble families. In addition, the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom was the first case in the Western world of a polity being formed with the explicit purpose of being a republic, although it didn't have much of a democracy. The Roman model of governance inspired many political thinkers over the centuries, and today's modern representative democracies imitate more the Roman than the Greek models because it was a state in which supreme power was held by the people and their elected representatives, and which had an elected or nominated leader.\nVaishali, capital city of the Vajjian Confederacy of (Vrijji mahajanapada), India was also considered one of the first examples of a republic around the 6th century BCE.\nOther cultures, such as the Iroquois Nation in the Americas between around 1450 and 1600 AD also developed a form of democratic society before they came in contact with the Europeans. This indicates that forms of democracy may have been invented in other societies around the world.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhile most regions in Europe during the Middle Ages were ruled by clergy or feudal lords, there existed various systems involving elections or assemblies, although often only involving a small part of the population. In Scandinavia, bodies known as things consisted of freemen presided by a lawspeaker. These deliberative bodies were responsible for settling political questions, and variants included the Althing in Iceland and the L\u00f8gting in the Faeroe Islands. The veche, found in Eastern Europe, was a similar body to the Scandinavian thing. In the Roman Catholic Church, the pope has been elected by a papal conclave composed of cardinals since 1059. The first documented parliamentary body in Europe was the Cortes of Le\u00f3n. Established by Alfonso IX in 1188, the Cortes had authority over setting taxation, foreign affairs and legislating, though the exact nature of its role remains disputed. The Republic of Ragusa, established in 1358 and centered around the city of Dubrovnik, provided representation and voting rights to its male aristocracy only. Various Italian city-states and polities had republic forms of government. For instance, the Republic of Florence, established in 1115, was led by the Signoria whose members were chosen by sortition. In 10th\u201315th century Frisia, a distinctly non-feudal society, the right to vote on local matters and on county officials was based on land size. The Kouroukan Fouga divided the Mali Empire into ruling clans (lineages) that were represented at a great assembly called the \"Gbara\". However, the charter made Mali more similar to a constitutional monarchy than a democratic republic.\nThe Parliament of England had its roots in the restrictions on the power of kings written into Magna Carta (1215), which explicitly protected certain rights of the King's subjects and implicitly supported what became the English writ of habeas corpus, safeguarding individual freedom against unlawful imprisonment with right to appeal. The first representative national assembly in England was Simon de Montfort's Parliament in 1265. The emergence of petitioning is some of the earliest evidence of parliament being used as a forum to address the general grievances of ordinary people. However, the power to call parliament remained at the pleasure of the monarch.\nStudies have linked the emergence of parliamentary institutions in Europe during the medieval period to urban agglomeration and the creation of new classes, such as artisans, as well as the presence of nobility and religious elites. Scholars have also linked the emergence of representative government to Europe's relative political fragmentation. New York University political scientist David Stasavage links the fragmentation of Europe, and its subsequent democratization, to the manner in which the Roman Empire collapsed: Roman territory was conquered by small fragmented groups of Germanic tribes, thus leading to the creation of small political units where rulers were relatively weak and needed the consent of the governed to ward off foreign threats.\nModern era.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 17th century England, there was renewed interest in Magna Carta. The Parliament of England passed the Petition of Right in 1628 which established certain liberties for subjects. The English Civil War (1642\u20131651) was fought between the King and an oligarchic but elected Parliament, during which the idea of a political party took form with groups debating rights to political representation during the Putney Debates of 1647. Subsequently, the Protectorate (1653\u201359) and the English Restoration (1660) restored more autocratic rule, although Parliament passed the Habeas Corpus Act in 1679 which strengthened the convention that forbade detention lacking sufficient cause or evidence. After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the Bill of Rights was enacted in 1689 which codified certain rights and liberties and is still in effect. The Bill set out the requirement for regular elections, rules for freedom of speech in Parliament and limited the power of the monarch, ensuring that, unlike much of Europe at the time, royal absolutism would not prevail. Economic historians Douglass North and Barry Weingast have characterized the institutions implemented in the Glorious Revolution as a resounding success in terms of restraining the government and ensuring protection for property rights.\nRenewed interest in the Magna Carta, the English Civil War, and the Glorious Revolution in the 17th century prompted the growth of political philosophy on the British Isles. Thomas Hobbes was the first philosopher to articulate a detailed social contract theory. Writing in \"Leviathan\" (1651), Hobbes theorized that individuals living in the state of nature led lives that were \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short\" and constantly waged a war of all against all. In order to prevent the occurrence of an anarchic state of nature, Hobbes reasoned that individuals ceded their rights to a strong, authoritarian government. Later, philosopher and physician John Locke would posit a different interpretation of social contract theory. Writing in his \"Two Treatises of Government\" (1689), Locke posited that all individuals possessed the inalienable rights to life, liberty and estate (property). According to Locke, individuals would voluntarily come together to form a state for the purposes of defending their rights. Particularly important for Locke were property rights, whose protection Locke deemed to be a government's primary purpose. Furthermore, Locke asserted that governments were legitimate only if they held the consent of the governed. For Locke, citizens had the right to revolt against a government that acted against their interest or became tyrannical. Although they were not widely read during his lifetime, Locke's works are considered the founding documents of liberal thought and profoundly influenced the leaders of the American Revolution and later the French Revolution. His liberal democratic framework of governance remains the preeminent form of democracy in the world. \nIn the Cossack republics of Ukraine in the 16th and 17th centuries, the Cossack Hetmanate and Zaporizhian Sich, the holder of the highest post of Hetman was elected by the representatives from the country's districts.\nIn North America, representative government began in Jamestown, Virginia, with the election of the House of Burgesses (forerunner of the Virginia General Assembly) in 1619. English Puritans who migrated from 1620 established colonies in New England whose local governance was democratic; although these local assemblies had some small amounts of devolved power, the ultimate authority was held by the Crown and the English Parliament. The Puritans (Pilgrim Fathers), Baptists, and Quakers who founded these colonies applied the democratic organisation of their congregations also to the administration of their communities in worldly matters.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe first Parliament of Great Britain was established in 1707, after the merger of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland under the Acts of Union. Although the monarch increasingly became a figurehead, Parliament was only elected by male property owners, which amounted to 3% of the population in 1780. The first known British person of African heritage to vote in a general election, Ignatius Sancho, voted in 1774 and 1780. During the Age of Liberty in Sweden (1718\u20131772), civil rights were expanded and power shifted from the monarch to parliament. The taxed peasantry was represented in parliament, although with little influence, but commoners without taxed property had no suffrage.\nThe creation of the short-lived Corsican Republic in 1755 marked the first nation in modern history to adopt a democratic constitution (all men and women above age of 25 could vote). This Corsican Constitution was the first based on Enlightenment principles and included female suffrage, something that was not granted in most other democracies until the 20th century.\nIn the American colonial period before 1776, and for some time after, often only adult white male property owners could vote; enslaved Africans, most free black people and most women were not extended the franchise. This changed state by state, beginning with the republican State of New Connecticut, soon after called Vermont, which, on declaring independence of Great Britain in 1777, adopted a constitution modelled on Pennsylvania's with citizenship and democratic suffrage for males with or without property, and went on to abolish slavery. The American Revolution led to the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787, the oldest surviving, still active, governmental codified constitution. The Constitution provided for an elected government and protected civil rights and liberties for some, but did not end slavery nor extend voting rights in the United States, instead leaving the issue of suffrage to the individual states. Generally, states limited suffrage to white male property owners and taxpayers. At the time of the first Presidential election in 1789, about 6% of the population was eligible to vote. The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only. The Bill of Rights in 1791 set limits on government power to protect personal freedoms but had little impact on judgements by the courts for the first 130 years after ratification.\nIn 1789, Revolutionary France adopted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and, although short-lived, the National Convention was elected by all men in 1792. The Polish-Lithuanian Constitution of 3 May 1791 sought to implement a more effective constitutional monarchy, introduced political equality between townspeople and nobility, and placed the peasants under the protection of the government, mitigating the worst abuses of serfdom. In force for less than 19 months, it was declared null and void by the Grodno Sejm that met in 1793. Nonetheless, the 1791 Constitution helped keep alive Polish aspirations for the eventual restoration of the country's sovereignty over a century later.\nHowever, in the early 19th century, little of democracy\u2014as theory, practice, or even as word\u2014remained in the North Atlantic world. During this period, slavery remained a social and economic institution in places around the world. This was particularly the case in the United States, where eight serving presidents had owned slaves, and the last fifteen slave states kept slavery legal in the American South until the Civil War. Advocating the movement of black people from the US to locations where they would enjoy greater freedom and equality, in the 1820s the abolitionist members of the ACS established the settlement of Liberia. The United Kingdom's Slave Trade Act 1807 banned the trade across the British Empire, which was enforced internationally by the Royal Navy under treaties Britain negotiated with other nations. In 1833, the UK passed the Slavery Abolition Act which took effect across the British Empire, although slavery was legally allowed to continue in areas controlled by the East India Company, in Ceylon, and in Saint Helena for an additional ten years.\nIn the United States, the 1828 presidential election was the first in which non-property-holding white males could vote in the vast majority of states. Voter turnout soared during the 1830s, reaching about 80% of the adult white male population in the 1840 presidential election. North Carolina was the last state to abolish property qualification in 1856 resulting in a close approximation to universal white male suffrage (however tax-paying requirements remained in five states in 1860 and survived in two states until the 20th century). In the 1860 United States Census, the slave population had grown to four million, and in Reconstruction after the Civil War, three constitutional amendments were passed: the 13th Amendment (1865) that ended slavery; the 14th Amendment (1869) that gave black people citizenship, and the 15th Amendment (1870) that gave black males a nominal right to vote. Full enfranchisement of citizens was not secured until after the civil rights movement gained passage by the US Congress of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nThe voting franchise in the United Kingdom was expanded and made more uniform in a series of reforms that began with the Reform Act 1832 and continued into the 20th century, notably with the Representation of the People Act 1918 and the Equal Franchise Act 1928. Universal male suffrage was established in France in March 1848 in the wake of the French Revolution of 1848. In 1848, several revolutions broke out in Europe as rulers were confronted with popular demands for liberal constitutions and more democratic government.\nIn 1876 the Ottoman Empire transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional one, and held two elections the next year to elect members to her newly formed parliament. Provisional Electoral Regulations were issued, stating that the elected members of the Provincial Administrative Councils would elect members to the first Parliament. Later that year, a new constitution was promulgated, which provided for a bicameral Parliament with a Senate appointed by the Sultan and a popularly elected Chamber of Deputies. Only men above the age of 30 who were competent in Turkish and had full civil rights were allowed to stand for election. Reasons for disqualification included holding dual citizenship, being employed by a foreign government, being bankrupt, employed as a servant, or having \"notoriety for ill deeds\". Full universal suffrage was achieved in 1934. \nIn 1893 the self-governing colony New Zealand became the first country in the world (except for the short-lived 18th-century Corsican Republic) to grant active universal suffrage by giving women the right to vote.\n20th and 21st centuries.\n20th-century transitions to liberal democracy have come in successive \"waves of democracy\", variously resulting from wars, revolutions, decolonisation, and religious and economic circumstances. Global waves of \"democratic regression\" reversing democratization, have also occurred in the 1920s and 30s, in the 1960s and 1970s, and in the 2010s.\nWorld War I and the dissolution of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires resulted in the creation of new nation-states from Europe, most of them at least nominally democratic.\nIn the 1920s democracy flourished and women's suffrage advanced, but the Great Depression brought disenchantment and most of the countries of Europe, Latin America, and Asia turned to strong-man rule or dictatorships. Fascism and dictatorships flourished in Nazi Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal, as well as non-democratic governments in the Baltics, the Balkans, Brazil, Cuba, China, and Japan, among others.\nWorld War II brought a definitive reversal of this trend in western Europe. The democratisation of the American, British, and French sectors of occupied Germany (disputed), Austria, Italy, and the occupied Japan served as a model for the later theory of government change. However, most of Eastern Europe, including the Soviet sector of Germany fell into the non-democratic Soviet bloc.\nThe war was followed by decolonisation, and again most of the new independent states had nominally democratic constitutions. India emerged as the world's largest democracy and continues to be so. Countries that were once part of the British Empire often adopted the British Westminster system.\nBy 1960, the vast majority of country-states were nominally democracies, although most of the world's populations lived in nations that experienced sham elections, and other forms of subterfuge (particularly in \"Communist\" nations and the former colonies.)\nA subsequent wave of democratisation brought substantial gains toward true liberal democracy for many nations. Portugal, Spain, and several of the military dictatorships in South America returned to civilian rule in the 1970s and 1980s. This was followed by nations in East and South Asia by the mid-to-late 1980s.\nEconomic malaise in the 1980s, along with resentment of Soviet oppression, contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union, the associated end of the Cold War, and the democratisation and liberalisation of the former Eastern bloc countries. The most successful of the new democracies were those geographically and culturally closest to western Europe, and they are now members or candidate members of the European Union. In 1986, after the toppling of the most prominent Asian dictatorship, the only democratic state of its kind at the time emerged in the Philippines with the rise of Corazon Aquino, who would later be known as the Mother of Asian Democracy.\nThe liberal trend spread to some nations in Africa in the 1990s, most prominently in South Africa. Some recent examples of attempts of liberalisation include the Indonesian Revolution of 1998, the Bulldozer Revolution in Yugoslavia, the Rose Revolution in Georgia, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Cedar Revolution in Lebanon, the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, and the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia.\nAccording to Freedom House, starting in 2005, there have been eleven consecutive years in which declines in political rights and civil liberties throughout the world have outnumbered improvements, as populist and nationalist political forces have gained ground everywhere from Poland (under the Law and Justice Party) to the Philippines (under Rodrigo Duterte).\nAccording to Freedom House, in 2007 there were 123 electoral democracies (up from 40 in 1972). According to \"World Forum on Democracy\", electoral democracies now represent 120 of the 192 existing countries and constitute 58.2 percent of the world's population. At the same time liberal democracies i.e. countries Freedom House regards as free and respectful of basic human rights and the rule of law are 85 in number and represent 38 percent of the global population.\nMost electoral democracies continue to exclude those younger than 18 from voting. The voting age has been lowered to 16 for national elections in a number of countries, including Brazil, Austria, Cuba, and Nicaragua. In California, a 2004 proposal to permit a quarter vote at 14 and a half vote at 16 was ultimately defeated. In 2008, the German parliament proposed but shelved a bill that would grant the vote to each citizen at birth, to be used by a parent until the child claims it for themselves.\nIn 2007 the United Nations declared 15 September the International Day of Democracy.\nIn a Freedom House report released in 2018, Democracy Scores for most countries declined for the 12th consecutive year. \"The Christian Science Monitor\" reported that nationalist and populist political ideologies were gaining ground, at the expense of rule of law, in countries like Poland, Turkey and Hungary. For example, in Poland, the President appointed 27 new Supreme Court judges over objections from the European Union. In Turkey, thousands of judges were removed from their positions following a failed coup attempt during a government crackdown .\nRepublics, though often associated with democracy because of the shared principle of rule by consent of the governed, are not necessarily democracies, as republicanism does not specify \"how\" the people are to rule.\nTheory.\nEarly theory.\nAristotle contrasted rule by the many (democracy/timocracy), with rule by the few (oligarchy/aristocracy), and with rule by a single person (tyranny or today autocracy/absolute monarchy). He also thought that there was a good and a bad variant of each system (he considered democracy to be the degenerate counterpart to timocracy).\nA common view among early and renaissance Republican theorists was that democracy could only survive in small political communities. Heeding the lessons of the Roman Republic's shift to monarchism as it grew larger or smaller, these Republican theorists held that the expansion of territory and population inevitably led to tyranny. Democracy was therefore highly fragile and rare historically, as it could only survive in small political units, which due to their size were vulnerable to conquest by larger political units. Montesquieu famously said, \"if a republic is small, it is destroyed by an outside force; if it is large, it is destroyed by an internal vice.\" Rousseau asserted, \"It is, therefore the natural property of small states to be governed as a republic, of middling ones to be subject to a monarch, and of large empires to be swayed by a despotic prince.\"\nContemporary theory.\nAmong modern political theorists, there are three contending conceptions of democracy: \"aggregative democracy\", \"deliberative democracy\", and \"radical democracy\".\nAggregative.\nThe theory of \"aggregative democracy\" claims that the aim of the democratic processes is to solicit citizens' preferences and aggregate them together to determine what social policies society should adopt. Therefore, proponents of this view hold that democratic participation should primarily focus on voting, where the policy with the most votes gets implemented.\nDifferent variants of aggregative democracy exist. Under \"minimalism\", democracy is a system of government in which citizens have given teams of political leaders the right to rule in periodic elections. According to this minimalist conception, citizens cannot and should not \"rule\" because, for example, on most issues, most of the time, they have no clear views or their views are not well-founded. Joseph Schumpeter articulated this view most famously in his book \"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy\". Contemporary proponents of minimalism include William H. Riker, Adam Przeworski, Richard Posner.\nAccording to the theory of direct democracy, on the other hand, citizens should vote directly, not through their representatives, on legislative proposals. Proponents of direct democracy offer varied reasons to support this view. Political activity can be valuable in itself, it socialises and educates citizens, and popular participation can check powerful elites. Most importantly, citizens do not rule themselves unless they directly decide laws and policies.\nGovernments will tend to produce laws and policies that are close to the views of the median voter\u2014with half to their left and the other half to their right. This is not a desirable outcome as it represents the action of self-interested and somewhat unaccountable political elites competing for votes. Anthony Downs suggests that ideological political parties are necessary to act as a mediating broker between individual and governments. Downs laid out this view in his 1957 book \"An Economic Theory of Democracy\".\nRobert A. Dahl argues that the fundamental democratic principle is that, when it comes to binding collective decisions, each person in a political community is entitled to have his/her interests be given equal consideration (not necessarily that all people are equally satisfied by the collective decision). He uses the term polyarchy to refer to societies in which there exists a certain set of institutions and procedures which are perceived as leading to such democracy. First and foremost among these institutions is the regular occurrence of free and open elections which are used to select representatives who then manage all or most of the public policy of the society. However, these polyarchic procedures may not create a full democracy if, for example, poverty prevents political participation. Similarly, Ronald Dworkin argues that \"democracy is a substantive, not a merely procedural, ideal.\"\nDeliberative.\n\"Deliberative democracy\" is based on the notion that democracy is government by deliberation. Unlike aggregative democracy, deliberative democracy holds that, for a democratic decision to be legitimate, it must be preceded by authentic deliberation, not merely the aggregation of preferences that occurs in voting. \"Authentic deliberation\" is deliberation among decision-makers that is free from distortions of unequal political power, such as power a decision-maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups. If the decision-makers cannot reach consensus after authentically deliberating on a proposal, then they vote on the proposal using a form of majority rule. Citizens assemblies are considered by many scholars as practical examples of deliberative democracy, with a recent OECD report identifying citizens assemblies as an increasingly popular mechanism to involve citizens in governmental decision-making.\nRadical.\n\"Radical democracy\" is based on the idea that there are hierarchical and oppressive power relations that exist in society. Democracy's role is to make visible and challenge those relations by allowing for difference, dissent and antagonisms in decision-making processes.\nMeasurement of democracy.\nSeveral freedom indices are published by several organisations according to their own various definitions of the term and relying on different types of data:\nDieter Fuchs and Edeltraud Roller suggest that, in order to truly measure the quality of democracy, objective measurements need to be complemented by \"subjective measurements based on the perspective of citizens\". Similarly, Quinton Mayne and Brigitte Gei\u00dfel also defend that the quality of democracy does not depend exclusively on the performance of institutions, but also on the citizens' own dispositions and commitment.\nDifficulties in measuring democracy.\nBecause democracy is an overarching concept that includes the functioning of diverse institutions which are not easy to measure, strong limitations exist in quantifying and econometrically measuring the potential effects of democracy or its relationship with other phenomena\u2014whether inequality, poverty, education etc. Given the constraints in acquiring reliable data with within-country variation on aspects of democracy, academics have largely studied cross-country variations. Yet variations between democratic institutions are very large across countries which constrains meaningful comparisons using statistical approaches. Since democracy is typically measured aggregately as a macro variable using a single observation for each country and each year, studying democracy faces a range of econometric constraints and is limited to basic correlations. Cross-country comparison of a composite, comprehensive and qualitative concept like democracy may thus not always be, for many purposes, methodologically rigorous or useful.\nTypes of governmental democracies.\nDemocracy has taken a number of forms, both in theory and practice. Some varieties of democracy provide better representation and more freedom for their citizens than others. However, if any democracy is not structured to prohibit the government from excluding the people from the legislative process, or any branch of government from altering the separation of powers in its favour, then a branch of the system can accumulate too much power and destroy the democracy.\nThe following kinds of democracy are not exclusive of one another: many specify details of aspects that are independent of one another and can co-exist in a single system.\nBasic forms.\nSeveral variants of democracy exist, but there are two basic forms, both of which concern how the whole body of all eligible citizens executes its will. One form of democracy is direct democracy, in which all eligible citizens have active participation in the political decision making, for example voting on policy initiatives directly. In most modern democracies, the whole body of eligible citizens remain the sovereign power but political power is exercised indirectly through elected representatives; this is called a representative democracy.\nDirect.\nDirect democracy is a political system where the citizens participate in the decision-making personally, contrary to relying on intermediaries or representatives. The use of a lot system, a characteristic of Athenian democracy, is unique to direct democracies. In this system, important governmental and administrative tasks are performed by citizens picked from a lottery. A direct democracy gives the voting population the power to:\nWithin modern-day representative governments, certain electoral tools like referendums, citizens' initiatives and recall elections are referred to as forms of direct democracy. However, some advocates of direct democracy argue for local assemblies of face-to-face discussion. Direct democracy as a government system currently exists in the Swiss cantons of Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus, the Rebel Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities, communities affiliated with the CIPO-RFM, the Bolivian city councils of FEJUVE, and Kurdish cantons of Rojava.\nRepresentative.\nRepresentative democracy involves the election of government officials by the people being represented. If the head of state is also democratically elected then it is called a democratic republic. The most common mechanisms involve election of the candidate with a majority or a plurality of the votes. Most western countries have representative systems.\nRepresentatives may be elected or become diplomatic representatives by a particular district (or constituency), or represent the entire electorate through proportional systems, with some using a combination of the two. Some representative democracies also incorporate elements of direct democracy, such as referendums. A characteristic of representative democracy is that while the representatives are elected by the people to act in the people's interest, they retain the freedom to exercise their own judgement as how best to do so. Such reasons have driven criticism upon representative democracy, pointing out the contradictions of representation mechanisms with democracy\nParliamentary.\nParliamentary democracy is a representative democracy where government is appointed by, or can be dismissed by, representatives as opposed to a \"presidential rule\" wherein the president is both head of state and the head of government and is elected by the voters. Under a parliamentary democracy, government is exercised by delegation to an executive ministry and subject to ongoing review, checks and balances by the legislative parliament elected by the people.\nParliamentary systems have the right to dismiss a Prime Minister at any point in time that they feel he or she is not doing their job to the expectations of the legislature. This is done through a Vote of No Confidence where the legislature decides whether or not to remove the Prime Minister from office by a majority support for his or her dismissal. In some countries, the Prime Minister can also call an election whenever he or she so chooses, and typically the Prime Minister will hold an election when he or she knows that they are in good favour with the public as to get re-elected. In other parliamentary democracies, extra elections are virtually never held, a minority government being preferred until the next ordinary elections. An important feature of the parliamentary democracy is the concept of the \"loyal opposition\". The essence of the concept is that the second largest political party (or coalition) opposes the governing party (or coalition), while still remaining loyal to the state and its democratic principles.\nPresidential.\nPresidential Democracy is a system where the public elects the president through free and fair elections. The president serves as both the head of state and head of government controlling most of the executive powers. The president serves for a specific term and cannot exceed that amount of time. Elections typically have a fixed date and aren't easily changed. The president has direct control over the cabinet, specifically appointing the cabinet members.\nThe president cannot be easily removed from office by the legislature, but he or she cannot remove members of the legislative branch any more easily. This provides some measure of separation of powers. In consequence, however, the president and the legislature may end up in the control of separate parties, allowing one to block the other and thereby interfere with the orderly operation of the state. This may be the reason why presidential democracy is not very common outside the Americas, Africa, and Central and Southeast Asia.\nA semi-presidential system is a system of democracy in which the government includes both a prime minister and a president. The particular powers held by the prime minister and president vary by country.\nHybrid or semi-direct.\nSome modern democracies that are predominantly representative in nature also heavily rely upon forms of political action that are directly democratic. These democracies, which combine elements of representative democracy and direct democracy, are termed \"hybrid democracies\", \"semi-direct democracies\" or \"participatory democracies\". Examples include Switzerland and some U.S. states, where frequent use is made of referendums and initiatives.\nThe Swiss confederation is a semi-direct democracy. At the federal level, citizens can propose changes to the constitution (federal popular initiative) or ask for a referendum to be held on any law voted by the parliament. Between January 1995 and June 2005, Swiss citizens voted 31 times, to answer 103 questions (during the same period, French citizens participated in only two referendums). Although in the past 120 years less than 250 initiatives have been put to referendum. The populace has been conservative, approving only about 10% of the initiatives put before them; in addition, they have often opted for a version of the initiative rewritten by government.\nExamples include the extensive use of referendums in the US state of California, which is a state that has more than 20 million voters.\nIn New England, Town meetings are often used, especially in rural areas, to manage local government. This creates a hybrid form of government, with a local direct democracy and a representative state government. For example, most Vermont towns hold annual town meetings in March in which town officers are elected, budgets for the town and schools are voted on, and citizens have the opportunity to speak and be heard on political matters.\nVariants.\nConstitutional monarchy.\nMany countries such as the United Kingdom, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Scandinavian countries, Thailand, Japan and Bhutan turned powerful monarchs into constitutional monarchs with limited or, often gradually, merely symbolic roles. For example, in the predecessor states to the United Kingdom, constitutional monarchy began to emerge and has continued uninterrupted since the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and passage of the Bill of Rights 1689.\nIn other countries, the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system (as in France, China, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece and Egypt). An elected president, with or without significant powers, became the head of state in these countries.\nElite upper houses of legislatures, which often had lifetime or hereditary tenure, were common in many nations. Over time, these either had their powers limited (as with the British House of Lords) or else became elective and remained powerful (as with the Australian Senate).\nRepublic.\nThe term \"republic\" has many different meanings, but today often refers to a representative democracy with an elected head of state, such as a president, serving for a limited term, in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these states also are representative democracies with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister.\nThe Founding Fathers of the United States rarely praised and often criticised democracy, which in their time tended to specifically mean direct democracy, often without the protection of a constitution enshrining basic rights; James Madison argued, especially in \"The Federalist\" No. 10, that what distinguished a direct \"democracy\" from a \"republic\" was that the former became weaker as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction, whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combats faction by its very structure.\nWhat was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government be \"bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend.\" As Benjamin Franklin was exiting after writing the U.S. constitution, Elizabeth Willing Powel asked him \"Well, Doctor, what have we got\u2014a republic or a monarchy?\". He replied \"A republic\u2014if you can keep it.\"\nLiberal democracy.\nA liberal democracy is a representative democracy in which the ability of the elected representatives to exercise decision-making power is subject to the rule of law, and moderated by a constitution or laws that emphasise the protection of the rights and freedoms of individuals, and which places constraints on the leaders and on the extent to which the will of the majority can be exercised against the rights of minorities (see civil liberties).\nIn a liberal democracy, it is possible for some large-scale decisions to emerge from the many individual decisions that citizens are free to make. In other words, citizens can \"vote with their feet\" or \"vote with their dollars\", resulting in significant informal government-by-the-masses that exercises many \"powers\" associated with formal government elsewhere.\nSocialist.\nSocialist thought has several different views on democracy. Social democracy, democratic socialism, and the dictatorship of the proletariat (usually exercised through Soviet democracy) are some examples. Many democratic socialists and social democrats believe in a form of participatory, industrial, economic and/or workplace democracy combined with a representative democracy.\nWithin Marxist orthodoxy there is a hostility to what is commonly called \"liberal democracy\", which is simply referred to as parliamentary democracy because of its often centralised nature. Because of orthodox Marxists' desire to eliminate the political elitism they see in capitalism, Marxists, Leninists and Trotskyists believe in direct democracy implemented through a system of communes (which are sometimes called soviets). This system ultimately manifests itself as council democracy and begins with workplace democracy.\nAnarchist.\nAnarchists are split in this domain, depending on whether they believe that a majority-rule is tyrannic or not. To many anarchists, the only form of democracy considered acceptable is direct democracy. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon argued that the only acceptable form of direct democracy is one in which it is recognised that majority decisions are not binding on the minority, even when unanimous. However, anarcho-communist Murray Bookchin criticised individualist anarchists for opposing democracy, and says \"majority rule\" is consistent with anarchism.\nSome anarcho-communists oppose the majoritarian nature of direct democracy, feeling that it can impede individual liberty and opt-in favour of a non-majoritarian form of consensus democracy, similar to Proudhon's position on direct democracy. Henry David Thoreau, who did not self-identify as an anarchist but argued for \"a better government\" and is cited as an inspiration by some anarchists, argued that people should not be in the position of ruling others or being ruled when there is no consent.\nSortition.\nSometimes called \"democracy without elections\", sortition chooses decision makers via a random process. The intention is that those chosen will be representative of the opinions and interests of the people at large, and be more fair and impartial than an elected official. The technique was in widespread use in Athenian Democracy and Renaissance Florence and is still used in modern jury selection.\nConsociational.\nA consociational democracy allows for simultaneous majority votes in two or more ethno-religious constituencies, and policies are enacted only if they gain majority support from both or all of them.\nConsensus democracy.\nA consensus democracy, in contrast, would not be dichotomous. Instead, decisions would be based on a multi-option approach, and policies would be enacted if they gained sufficient support, either in a purely verbal agreement or via a consensus vote\u2014a multi-option preference vote. If the threshold of support were at a sufficiently high level, minorities would be as it were protected automatically. Furthermore, any voting would be ethno-colour blind.\nSupranational.\nQualified majority voting is designed by the Treaty of Rome to be the principal method of reaching decisions in the European Council of Ministers. This system allocates votes to member states in part according to their population, but heavily weighted in favour of the smaller states. This might be seen as a form of representative democracy, but representatives to the Council might be appointed rather than directly elected.\nInclusive.\nInclusive democracy is a political theory and political project that aims for direct democracy in all fields of social life: political democracy in the form of face-to-face assemblies which are confederated, economic democracy in a stateless, moneyless and marketless economy, democracy in the social realm, i.e. self-management in places of work and education, and ecological democracy which aims to reintegrate society and nature. The theoretical project of inclusive democracy emerged from the work of political philosopher Takis Fotopoulos in \"Towards An Inclusive Democracy\" and was further developed in the journal \"Democracy &amp; Nature\" and its successor \"The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy\".\nThe basic unit of decision making in an inclusive democracy is the demotic assembly, i.e. the assembly of demos, the citizen body in a given geographical area which may encompass a town and the surrounding villages, or even neighbourhoods of large cities. An inclusive democracy today can only take the form of a confederal democracy that is based on a network of administrative councils whose members or delegates are elected from popular face-to-face democratic assemblies in the various demoi. Thus, their role is purely administrative and practical, not one of policy-making like that of representatives in representative democracy.\nThe citizen body is advised by experts but it is the citizen body which functions as the ultimate decision-taker. Authority can be delegated to a segment of the citizen body to carry out specific duties, for example, to serve as members of popular courts, or of regional and confederal councils. Such delegation is made, in principle, by lot, on a rotation basis, and is always recallable by the citizen body. Delegates to regional and confederal bodies should have specific mandates.\nParticipatory politics.\nA Parpolity or Participatory Polity is a theoretical form of democracy that is ruled by a Nested Council structure. The guiding philosophy is that people should have decision making power in proportion to how much they are affected by the decision. Local councils of 25\u201350 people are completely autonomous on issues that affect only them, and these councils send delegates to higher level councils who are again autonomous regarding issues that affect only the population affected by that council.\nA council court of randomly chosen citizens serves as a check on the tyranny of the majority, and rules on which body gets to vote on which issue. Delegates may vote differently from how their sending council might wish but are mandated to communicate the wishes of their sending council. Delegates are recallable at any time. Referendums are possible at any time via votes of most lower-level councils, however, not everything is a referendum as this is most likely a waste of time. A parpolity is meant to work in tandem with a participatory economy.\nCosmopolitan.\nCosmopolitan democracy, also known as \"Global democracy\" or \"World Federalism\", is a political system in which democracy is implemented on a global scale, either directly or through representatives. An important justification for this kind of system is that the decisions made in national or regional democracies often affect people outside the constituency who, by definition, cannot vote. By contrast, in a cosmopolitan democracy, the people who are affected by decisions also have a say in them.\nAccording to its supporters, any attempt to solve global problems is undemocratic without some form of cosmopolitan democracy. The general principle of cosmopolitan democracy is to expand some or all of the values and norms of democracy, including the rule of law; the non-violent resolution of conflicts; and equality among citizens, beyond the limits of the state. To be fully implemented, this would require reforming existing international organisations, e.g. the United Nations, as well as the creation of new institutions such as a World Parliament, which ideally would enhance public control over, and accountability in, international politics.\nCosmopolitan Democracy has been promoted, among others, by physicist Albert Einstein, writer Kurt Vonnegut, columnist George Monbiot, and professors David Held and Daniele Archibugi. The creation of the International Criminal Court in 2003 was seen as a major step forward by many supporters of this type of cosmopolitan democracy.\nCreative democracy.\nCreative Democracy is advocated by American philosopher John Dewey. The main idea about Creative Democracy is that democracy encourages individual capacity building and the interaction among the society. Dewey argues that democracy is a way of life in his work of \"Creative Democracy: The Task Before Us\" and an experience built on faith in human nature, faith in human beings, and faith in working with others. Democracy, in Dewey's view, is a moral ideal requiring actual effort and work by people; it is not an institutional concept that exists outside of ourselves. \"The task of democracy\", Dewey concludes, \"is forever that of creation of a freer and more humane experience in which all share and to which all contribute\".\nGuided democracy.\nGuided democracy is a form of democracy which incorporates regular popular elections, but which often carefully \"guides\" the choices offered to the electorate in a manner which may reduce the ability of the electorate to truly determine the type of government exercised over them. Such democracies typically have only one central authority which is often not subject to meaningful public review by any other governmental authority. Russian-style democracy has often been referred to as a \"Guided democracy.\" Russian politicians have referred to their government as having only one center of power/ authority, as opposed to most other forms of democracy which usually attempt to incorporate two or more naturally competing sources of authority within the same government.\nNon-governmental democracy.\nAside from the public sphere, similar democratic principles and mechanisms of voting and representation have been used to govern other kinds of groups. Many non-governmental organisations decide policy and leadership by voting. Most trade unions and cooperatives are governed by democratic elections. Corporations are controlled by shareholders on the principle of one share, one vote\u2014sometimes supplemented by workplace democracy. Amitai Etzioni has postulated a system that fuses elements of democracy with sharia law, termed \"islamocracy\".\nJustification.\nSeveral justifications for democracy have been postulated.\nLegitimacy.\nSocial contract theory argues that the legitimacy of government is based on consent of the governed, i.e. an election, and that political decisions must reflect the general will.\nBetter decision-making.\nCondorcet's jury theorem is logical proof that if each decision-maker has a better than chance probability of making the right decision, then having the largest number of decision-makers, i.e. a democracy, will result in the best decisions. This has also been argued by theories of the wisdom of the crowd.\nDemocratic peace.\nDemocratic peace theory claims that liberal democracies do not go to war against each other.\nEconomic success.\nIn \"Why Nations Fail\", Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson argue that democracies are more economically successful because undemocratic political systems tend to limit markets and favor monopolies at the expense of the creative destruction which is necessary for sustained economic growth.\nCriticism.\nArrow's theorem.\nArrow's impossibility theorem suggests that democracy is logically incoherent. This is based on a certain set of criteria for democratic decision-making being inherently conflicting. However, Arrow's formal premises can be considered overly strict, and with their reasonable weakening, the logical incoherence of democracy looks much less critical.\nInefficiencies.\nSome economists have criticized the efficiency of democracy, citing the premise of the irrational voter, or a voter who makes decisions without all of the facts or necessary information in order to make a truly informed decision. Another argument is that democracy slows down processes because of the amount of input and participation needed in order to go forward with a decision. A common example often quoted to substantiate this point is the high economic development achieved by China (a non-democratic country) as compared to India (a democratic country). According to economists, the lack of democratic participation in countries like China allows for unfettered economic growth.\nOn the other hand, Socrates believed that democracy without educated masses (educated in the broader sense of being knowledgeable and responsible) would only lead to populism being the criteria to become an elected leader and not competence. This would ultimately lead to a demise of the nation. This was quoted by Plato in book 10 of The Republic, in Socrates' conversation with Adimantus. Socrates was of the opinion that the right to vote must not be an indiscriminate right (for example by birth or citizenship), but must be given only to people who thought sufficiently of their choice.\nPopular rule as a fa\u00e7ade.\nThe 20th-century Italian thinkers Vilfredo Pareto and Gaetano Mosca (independently) argued that democracy was illusory, and served only to mask the reality of elite rule. Indeed, they argued that elite oligarchy is the unbendable law of human nature, due largely to the apathy and division of the masses (as opposed to the drive, initiative and unity of the elites), and that democratic institutions would do no more than shift the exercise of power from oppression to manipulation. As Louis Brandeis once professed, \"We may have democracy, or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can't have both.\". British writer Ivo Mosley, grandson of blackshirt Oswald Mosley describes in \"In the Name of the People: Pseudo-Democracy and the Spoiling of Our World\", how and why current forms of electoral governance are destined to fall short of their promise.\nA study led by Princeton professor Martin Gilens of 1,779 U.S. government decisions concluded that\n\"elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no independent influence.\" \nMob rule.\nPlato's \"The Republic\" presents a critical view of democracy through the narration of Socrates: \"Democracy, which is a charming form of government, full of variety and disorder, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequaled alike.\" In his work, Plato lists 5 forms of government from best to worst. Assuming that \"the Republic\" was intended to be a serious critique of the political thought in Athens, Plato argues that only Kallipolis, an aristocracy led by the unwilling philosopher-kings (the wisest men), is a just form of government.\nJames Madison critiqued direct democracy (which he referred to simply as \"democracy\") in Federalist No. 10, arguing that representative democracy\u2014which he described using the term \"republic\"\u2014is a preferable form of government, saying: \"...\u00a0democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention; have ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of property; and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their deaths.\" Madison offered that republics were superior to democracies because republics safeguarded against tyranny of the majority, stating in Federalist No. 10: \"the same advantage which a republic has over a democracy, in controlling the effects of faction, is enjoyed by a large over a small republic\".\nPolitical instability.\nMore recently, democracy is criticised for not offering enough political stability. As governments are frequently elected on and off there tends to be frequent changes in the policies of democratic countries both domestically and internationally. Even if a political party maintains power, vociferous, headline-grabbing protests and harsh criticism from the popular media are often enough to force sudden, unexpected political change. Frequent policy changes with regard to business and immigration are likely to deter investment and so hinder economic growth. For this reason, many people have put forward the idea that democracy is undesirable for a developing country in which economic growth and the reduction of poverty are top priorities.\nThis opportunist alliance not only has the handicap of having to cater to too many ideologically opposing factions, but it is usually short-lived since any perceived or actual imbalance in the treatment of coalition partners, or changes to leadership in the coalition partners themselves, can very easily result in the coalition partner withdrawing its support from the government.\nBiased media has been accused of causing political instability, resulting in the obstruction of democracy, rather than its promotion.\nFraudulent elections.\nIn representative democracies, it may not benefit incumbents to conduct fair elections. A study showed that incumbents who rig elections stay in office 2.5 times as long as those who permit fair elections. Democracies in countries with high per capita income have been found to be less prone to violence, but in countries with low incomes the tendency is the reverse. Election misconduct is more likely in countries with low per capita incomes, small populations, rich in natural resources, and a lack of institutional checks and balances. Sub-Saharan countries, as well as Afghanistan, all tend to fall into that category.\nGovernments that have frequent elections tend to have significantly more stable economic policies than those governments who have infrequent elections. However, this trend does not apply to governments where fraudulent elections are common.\nOpposition.\nDemocracy in modern times has almost always faced opposition from the previously existing government, and many times it has faced opposition from social elites. The implementation of a democratic government within a non-democratic state is typically brought about by democratic revolution.\nDevelopment.\nSeveral philosophers and researchers have outlined historical and social factors seen as supporting the evolution of democracy.\nOther commentators have mentioned the influence of economic development. In a related theory, Ronald Inglehart suggests that improved living-standards in modern developed countries can convince people that they can take their basic survival for granted, leading to increased emphasis on self-expression values, which correlates closely with democracy.\nDouglas M. Gibler and Andrew Owsiak in their study argued about the importance of peace and stable borders for the development of democracy. It has often been assumed that democracy causes peace, but this study shows that, historically, peace has almost always predated the establishment of democracy.\nCarroll Quigley concludes that the characteristics of weapons are the main predictor of democracy: Democracy\u2014this scenario\u2014tends to emerge only when the best weapons available are easy for individuals to obtain and use. By the 1800s, guns were the best personal weapons available, and in the United States of America (already nominally democratic), almost everyone could afford to buy a gun, and could learn how to use it fairly easily. Governments couldn't do any better: it became the age of mass armies of citizen soldiers with guns. Similarly, Periclean Greece was an age of the citizen soldier and democracy.\nOther theories stressed the relevance of education and of human capital\u2014and within them of cognitive ability to increasing tolerance, rationality, political literacy and participation. Two effects of education and cognitive ability are distinguished:\nEvidence consistent with conventional theories of why democracy emerges and is sustained has been hard to come by. Statistical analyses have challenged modernisation theory by demonstrating that there is no reliable evidence for the claim that democracy is more likely to emerge when countries become wealthier, more educated, or less unequal. Neither is there convincing evidence that increased reliance on oil revenues prevents democratisation, despite a vast theoretical literature on \"the Resource Curse\" that asserts that oil revenues sever the link between citizen taxation and government accountability, seen as the key to representative democracy. The lack of evidence for these conventional theories of democratisation have led researchers to search for the \"deep\" determinants of contemporary political institutions, be they geographical or demographic. More inclusive institutions lead to democracy because as people gain more power, they are able to demand more from the elites, who in turn have to concede more things to keep their position. This virtuous circle may end up in democracy.\nAn example of this is the disease environment. Places with different mortality rates had different populations and productivity levels around the world. For example, in Africa, the tsetse fly\u2014which afflicts humans and livestock\u2014reduced the ability of Africans to plow the land. This made Africa less settled. As a consequence, political power was less concentrated. This also affected the colonial institutions European countries established in Africa. Whether colonial settlers could live or not in a place made them develop different institutions which led to different economic and social paths. This also affected the distribution of power and the collective actions people could take. As a result, some African countries ended up having democracies and others autocracies.\nAn example of geographical determinants for democracy is having access to coastal areas and rivers. This natural endowment has a positive relation with economic development thanks to the benefits of trade. Trade brought economic development, which in turn, broadened power. Rulers wanting to increase revenues had to protect property-rights to create incentives for people to invest. As more people had more power, more concessions had to be made by the ruler and in many places this process lead to democracy. These determinants defined the structure of the society moving the balance of political power.\nIn the 21st century, democracy has become such a popular method of reaching decisions that its application beyond politics to other areas such as entertainment, food and fashion, consumerism, urban planning, education, art, literature, science and theology has been criticised as \"the reigning dogma of our time\". The argument suggests that applying a populist or market-driven approach to art and literature (for example), means that innovative creative work goes unpublished or unproduced. In education, the argument is that essential but more difficult studies are not undertaken. Science, as a truth-based discipline, is particularly corrupted by the idea that the correct conclusion can be arrived at by popular vote. However, more recently, theorists have also advanced the concept epistemic democracy to assert that democracy actually does a good job tracking the truth.\nRobert Michels asserts that although democracy can never be fully realised, democracy may be developed automatically in the act of striving for democracy:\nThe peasant in the fable, when on his death-bed, tells his sons that a treasure is buried in the field. After the old man's death the sons dig everywhere in order to discover the treasure. They do not find it. But their indefatigable labor improves the soil and secures for them a comparative well-being. The treasure in the fable may well symbolise democracy.\nDr. Harald Wydra, in his book \"Communism and The Emergence of Democracy\" (2007), maintains that the development of democracy should not be viewed as a purely procedural or as a static concept but rather as an ongoing \"process of meaning formation\". Drawing on Claude Lefort's idea of the empty place of power, that \"power emanates from the people [...] but is the power of nobody\", he remarks that democracy is reverence to a symbolic mythical authority\u2014as in reality, there is no such thing as the people or \"demos\". Democratic political figures are not supreme rulers but rather temporary guardians of an empty place. Any claim to substance such as the collective good, the public interest or the will of the nation is subject to the competitive struggle and times of for gaining the authority of office and government. The essence of the democratic system is an empty place, void of real people, which can only be temporarily filled and never be appropriated. The seat of power is there but remains open to constant change. As such, people's definitions of \"democracy\" or of \"democratic\" progress throughout history as a continual and potentially never-ending process of social construction."}
{"id": "7960", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7960", "title": "Deduction and induction", "text": "Deduction and induction may refer to:"}
{"id": "7961", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7961", "title": "Documentary Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "7962", "revid": "41343373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7962", "title": "Logical disjunction", "text": "In logic, disjunction is a logical connective typically notated formula_1 whose meaning either refines or corresponds to that of natural language expressions such as \"or\". In classical logic, it is given a truth functional semantics on which formula_2 is true unless both formula_3 and formula_4 are false. Because this semantics allows a disjunctive formula to be true when both of its disjuncts are true, it is an \"inclusive\" interpretation of disjunction, in contrast with exclusive disjunction. Classical proof theoretical treatments are often given in terms of rules such as disjunction introduction and disjunction elimination. Disjunction has also been given numerous non-classical treatments, motivated by problems including Aristotle's sea battle argument, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, as well the numerous mismatches between classical disjunction and its nearest equivalents in natural language.\nNotation.\nIn logic and related fields, disjunction is customarily notated with an infix operator formula_5. Alternative notations include formula_6, used mainly in electronics, as well as formula_7 and formula_8 in many programming languages. The English word \"or\" is sometimes used as well, often in capital letters. In Jan \u0141ukasiewicz's prefix notation for logic, the operator is A, short for Polish \"alternatywa\" (English: alternative).\nClassical disjunction.\nSemantics.\nClassical disjunction is a truth functional operation which returns the truth value \"true\" unless both of its arguments are \"false\". Its semantic entry is standardly given as follows:\nThis semantics is corresponds to the following truth table:\nDefined by other operators.\nIn systems where logical disjunction is not a primitive, it may be defined as\nThis can be checked by the following truth table:\nProperties.\nThe following properties apply to disjunction:\nApplications in computer science.\nOperators corresponding to logical disjunction exist in most programming languages.\nBitwise operation.\nDisjunction is often used for bitwise operations. Examples:\nThe codice_1 operator can be used to set bits in a bit field to 1, by codice_1-ing the field with a constant field with the relevant bits set to 1. For example, codice_3 will force the final bit to 1, while leaving other bits unchanged.\nLogical operation.\nMany languages distinguish between bitwise and logical disjunction by providing two distinct operators; in languages following C, bitwise disjunction is performed with the single pipe operator (codice_4), and logical disjunction with the double pipe (codice_5) operator.\nLogical disjunction is usually short-circuited; that is, if the first (left) operand evaluates to codice_6, then the second (right) operand is not evaluated. The logical disjunction operator thus usually constitutes a sequence point.\nIn a parallel (concurrent) language, it is possible to short-circuit both sides: they are evaluated in parallel,\nand if one terminates with value true, the other is interrupted. This operator is thus called the parallel or.\nAlthough the type of a logical disjunction expression is boolean in most languages (and thus can only have the value codice_6 or codice_8), in some languages (such as Python and JavaScript), the logical disjunction operator returns one of its operands: the first operand if it evaluates to a true value, and the second operand otherwise.\nConstructive disjunction.\nThe Curry\u2013Howard correspondence relates a constructivist form of disjunction to tagged union types.\nSet theory.\nThe membership of an element of a union set in set theory is defined in terms of a logical disjunction: \"x\" \u2208 \"A\" \u222a \"B\" if and only if (\"x\" \u2208 \"A\") \u2228 (\"x\" \u2208 \"B\"). Because of this, logical disjunction satisfies many of the same identities as set-theoretic union, such as associativity, commutativity, distributivity, and de Morgan's laws, identifying logical conjunction with set intersection, logical negation with set complement.\nNatural language.\nThe classical denotation for formula_5 does not precisely match the denotation of disjunctive statements in natural languages such as English. Notably, classical disjunction is inclusive while natural language disjunction is often understood exclusively.\nThis inference has sometimes been understood as an entailment, for instance by Alfred Tarski, who suggested that natural language disjunction is ambiguous between a classical and a nonclassical interpretation. More recent work in pragmatics has shown that this inference can be derived as a conversational implicature on the basis of a semantic denotation which behaves classically. However, disjunctive constructions including Hungarian \"vagy... vagy\" and French \"soit... soit\" have been argued to be inherently exclusive, rendering ungrammaticality in contexts where an inclusive reading would otherwise be forced.\nSimilar deviations from classical logic have been noted in cases such as free choice disjunction and simplification of disjunctive antecedents, where certain modal operators trigger a conjunction-like interpretation of disjunction. As with exclusivity, these inferences have been analyzed both as implicatures and as entailments arising from a nonclassical interpretation of disjunction.\nIn many languages, disjunctive expressions play a role in question formation. For instance, while the following English example can be interpreted as a polar question asking whether it's true that Mary is either a philosopher or a linguist, it can also be interpreted as an alternative question asking which of the two professions is hers. The role of disjunction in these cases has be analyzed using nonclassical logics such as alternative semantics and inquisitive semantics, which have also been adopted to explain the free choice and simplification inferences.\nIn English, as in many other languages, disjunction is expressed by a coordinating conjunction. Other languages express disjunctive meanings in a variety of ways, though it is unknown whether disjunction itself is a linguistic universal. In many languages such as Dyirbal and Maricopa, disjunction is marked using a verb suffix. For instance, in the Maricopa example below, disjunction is marked by the suffix \"\u0161aa\"."}
{"id": "7963", "revid": "998484945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7963", "title": "Disjunctive syllogism", "text": "In classical logic, disjunctive syllogism (historically known as modus tollendo ponens (MTP), Latin for \"mode that affirms by denying\") is a valid argument form which is a syllogism having a disjunctive statement for one of its premises.\nAn example in English:\nPropositional logic.\nIn propositional logic, disjunctive syllogism (also known as disjunction elimination and or elimination, or abbreviated \u2228E), is a valid rule of inference. If we are told that at least one of two statements is true; and also told that it is not the former that is true; we can infer that it has to be the latter that is true. If \"P\" is true or \"Q\" is true and \"P\" is false, then \"Q\" is true. The reason this is called \"disjunctive syllogism\" is that, first, it is a syllogism, a three-step argument, and second, it contains a logical disjunction, which simply means an \"or\" statement. \"P or Q\" is a disjunction; P and Q are called the statement's \"disjuncts\". The rule makes it possible to eliminate a disjunction from a logical proof. It is the rule that:\nwhere the rule is that whenever instances of \"formula_2\", and \"formula_3\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_4\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nDisjunctive syllogism is closely related and similar to hypothetical syllogism, in that it is also a type of syllogism, and also the name of a rule of inference. It is also related to the law of noncontradiction, one of the .\nFormal notation.\nThe \"disjunctive syllogism\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nwhere formula_6 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_4 is a syntactic consequence of formula_2, and formula_9 in some logical system;\nand expressed as a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nwhere formula_11, and formula_4 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nNatural language examples.\nHere is an example:\nHere is another example:\nInclusive and exclusive disjunction.\nPlease observe that the disjunctive syllogism works whether 'or' is considered 'exclusive' or 'inclusive' disjunction. See below for the definitions of these terms.\nThere are two kinds of logical disjunction:\nThe widely used English language concept of \"or\" is often ambiguous between these two meanings, but the difference is pivotal in evaluating disjunctive arguments.\nThis argument:\nis valid and indifferent between both meanings. However, only in the \"exclusive\" meaning is the following form valid:\nWith the \"inclusive\" meaning you could draw no conclusion from the first two premises of that argument. See affirming a disjunct.\nRelated argument forms.\nUnlike \"modus ponens\" and \"modus ponendo tollens\", with which it should not be confused, disjunctive syllogism is often not made an explicit rule or axiom of logical systems, as the above arguments can be proven with a (slightly devious) combination of reductio ad absurdum and disjunction elimination.\nOther forms of syllogism include:\nDisjunctive syllogism holds in classical propositional logic and intuitionistic logic, but not in some paraconsistent logics."}
{"id": "7964", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7964", "title": "Definition", "text": "A definition is a statement of the meaning of a term (a word, phrase, or other set of symbols). Definitions can be classified into two large categories, intensional definitions (which try to give the sense of a term) and extensional definitions (which try to list the objects that a term describes). Another important category of definitions is the class of ostensive definitions, which convey the meaning of a term by pointing out examples. A term may have many different senses and multiple meanings, and thus require multiple definitions.\nIn mathematics, a definition is used to give a precise meaning to a new term, by describing a condition which unambiguously qualifies what a mathematical term is and is not. Definitions and axioms form the basis on which all of modern mathematics is to be constructed.\nBasic terminology.\nIn modern usage, a \"definition\" is something, typically expressed in words, that attaches a meaning to a word or group of words. The word or group of words that is to be defined is called the \"definiendum\", and the word, group of words, or action that defines it is called the \"definiens\". For example, in the definition \"An elephant is a large gray animal native to Asia and Africa\", the word \"elephant\" is the \"definiendum\", and everything after the word \"is\" is the \"definiens\".\nThe \"definiens\" is not \"the meaning\" of the word defined, but is instead something that \"conveys the same meaning\" as that word.\nThere are many sub-types of definitions, often specific to a given field of knowledge or study. These include, among many others, lexical definitions, or the common dictionary definitions of words already in a language; demonstrative definitions, which define something by pointing to an example of it (\"\"This,\" [said while pointing to a large grey animal], \"is an Asian elephant.\"\"); and precising definitions, which reduce the vagueness of a word, typically in some special sense (\"'Large', among female Asian elephants, is any individual weighing over 5,500 pounds.\").\nIntensional definitions vs extensional definitions.\nAn \"intensional definition\", also called a \"connotative\" definition, specifies the necessary and sufficient conditions for a thing to be a member of a specific set. Any definition that attempts to set out the essence of something, such as that by genus and differentia, is an intensional definition.\nAn \"extensional definition\", also called a \"denotative\" definition, of a concept or term specifies its \"extension\". It is a list naming every object that is a member of a specific set.\nThus, the \"seven deadly sins\" can be defined \"intensionally\" as those singled out by Pope Gregory I as particularly destructive of the life of grace and charity within a person, thus creating the threat of eternal damnation. An \"extensional\" definition, on the other hand, would be the list of wrath, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony. In contrast, while an intensional definition of \"Prime Minister\" might be \"the most senior minister of a cabinet in the executive branch of parliamentary government\", an extensional definition is not possible since it is not known who the future prime ministers will be (even though all prime ministers from the past and present can be listed).\nClasses of intensional definitions.\nA genus\u2013differentia definition is a type of intensional definition that takes a large category (the genus) and narrows it down to a smaller category by a distinguishing characteristic (i.e. the differentia).\nMore formally, a genus\u2013differentia definition consists of:\nFor example, consider the following genus\u2013differentia definitions:\nThose definitions can be expressed as a genus (\"a plane figure\") and two differentiae (\"that has three straight bounding sides\" and \"that has four straight bounding sides\", respectively).\nIt is also possible to have two different genus\u2013differentia definitions that describe the same term, especially when the term describes the overlap of two large categories. For instance, both of these genus\u2013differentia definitions of \"square\" are equally acceptable:\nThus, a \"square\" is a member of both genera (the plural of \"genus\"): the genus \"rectangle\" and the genus \"rhombus\".\nClasses of extensional definitions.\nOne important form of the extensional definition is \"ostensive definition\". This gives the meaning of a term by pointing, in the case of an individual, to the thing itself, or in the case of a class, to examples of the right kind. For example, one can explain who \"Alice\" (an individual) is, by pointing her out to another; or what a \"rabbit\" (a class) is, by pointing at several and expecting another to understand. The process of ostensive definition itself was critically appraised by Ludwig Wittgenstein.\nAn \"enumerative definition\" of a concept or a term is an \"extensional definition\" that gives an explicit and exhaustive listing of all the objects that fall under the concept or term in question. Enumerative definitions are only possible for finite sets (and in fact only practical for relatively small sets).\n\"Divisio\" and \"partitio\".\n\"Divisio\" and \"partitio\" are classical terms for definitions. A \"partitio\" is simply an intensional definition. A \"divisio\" is not an extensional definition, but an exhaustive list of subsets of a set, in the sense that every member of the \"divided\" set is a member of one of the subsets. An extreme form of \"divisio\" lists all sets whose only member is a member of the \"divided\" set. The difference between this and an extensional definition is that extensional definitions list \"members\", and not \"subsets\".\nNominal definitions vs real definitions.\nIn classical thought, a definition was taken to be a statement of the essence of a thing. Aristotle had it that an object's essential attributes form its \"essential nature\", and that a definition of the object must include these essential attributes.\nThe idea that a definition should state the essence of a thing led to the distinction between \"nominal\" and \"real\" essence\u2014a distinction originating with Aristotle. In the Posterior Analytics, he says that the meaning of a made-up name can be known (he gives the example \"goat stag\") without knowing what he calls the \"essential nature\" of the thing that the name would denote (if there were such a thing). This led medieval logicians to distinguish between what they called the \"quid nominis\", or the \"whatness of the name\", and the underlying nature common to all the things it names, which they called the \"quid rei\", or the \"whatness of the thing\". The name \"hobbit\", for example, is perfectly meaningful. It has a \"quid nominis\", but one could not know the real nature of hobbits, and so the \"quid rei\" of hobbits cannot be known. By contrast, the name \"man\" denotes real things (men) that have a certain \"quid rei\". The meaning of a name is distinct from the nature that a thing must have in order that the name apply to it.\nThis leads to a corresponding distinction between \"nominal\" and \"real\" definitions. A nominal definition is the definition explaining what a word means (i.e., which says what the \"nominal essence\" is), and is definition in the classical sense as given above. A real definition, by contrast, is one expressing the real nature or \"quid rei\" of the thing.\nThis preoccupation with essence dissipated in much of modern philosophy. Analytic philosophy, in particular, is critical of attempts to elucidate the essence of a thing. Russell described essence as \"a hopelessly muddle-headed notion\".\nMore recently Kripke's formalisation of possible world semantics in modal logic led to a new approach to essentialism. Insofar as the essential properties of a thing are \"necessary\" to it, they are those things that it possesses in all possible worlds. Kripke refers to names used in this way as rigid designators.\nOperational Versus Theoretical Definitions.\nA definition may also be classified as an operational definition or theoretical definition.\nTerms with multiple definitions.\nHomonyms.\nA homonym is, in the strict sense, one of a group of words that share the same spelling and pronunciation but have different meanings. Thus homonyms are simultaneously homographs (words that share the same spelling, regardless of their pronunciation) \"and\" homophones (words that share the same pronunciation, regardless of their spelling). The state of being a homonym is called homonymy. Examples of homonyms are the pair \"stalk\" (part of a plant) and \"stalk\" (follow/harass a person) and the pair \"left\" (past tense of leave) and \"left\" (opposite of right). A distinction is sometimes made between \"true\" homonyms, which are unrelated in origin, such as \"skate\" (glide on ice) and \"skate\" (the fish), and polysemous homonyms, or polysemes, which have a shared origin, such as \"mouth\" (of a river) and \"mouth\" (of an animal).\nPolysemes.\nPolysemy is the capacity for a sign (such as a word, phrase, or symbol) to have multiple meanings (that is, multiple semes or sememes and thus multiple senses), usually related by contiguity of meaning within a semantic field. It is thus usually regarded as distinct from homonymy, in which the multiple meanings of a word may be unconnected or unrelated.\nIn logic and mathematics.\nIn mathematics, definitions are generally not used to describe existing terms, but to describe or characterize a concept. For naming the object of a definition mathematicians can use either a neologism (this was mainly the case in the past) or words or phrases of the common language (this is generally the case in modern mathematics). The precise meaning of a term given by a mathematical definition is often different than the English definition of the word used, which can lead to confusion, particularly when the meanings are close. For example a set is not exactly the same thing in mathematics and in common language. In some case, the word used can be misleading; for example, a real number has nothing more (or less) real than an imaginary number. Frequently, a definition uses a phrase built with common English words, which has no meaning outside mathematics, such as primitive group or irreducible variety.\nClassification.\nAuthors have used different terms to classify definitions used in formal languages like mathematics. Norman Swartz classifies a definition as \"stipulative\" if it is intended to guide a specific discussion. A stipulative definition might be considered a temporary, working definition, and can only be disproved by showing a logical contradiction. In contrast, a \"descriptive\" definition can be shown to be \"right\" or \"wrong\" with reference to general usage.\nSwartz defines a \"precising definition\" as one that extends the descriptive dictionary definition (lexical definition) for a specific purpose by including additional criteria. A precising definition narrows the set of things that meet the definition.\nC.L. Stevenson has identified \"persuasive definition\" as a form of stipulative definition which purports to state the \"true\" or \"commonly accepted\" meaning of a term, while in reality stipulating an altered use (perhaps as an argument for some specific belief). Stevenson has also noted that some definitions are \"legal\" or \"coercive\"\u00a0\u2013 their object is to create or alter rights, duties, or crimes.\nRecursive definitions.\nA recursive definition, sometimes also called an \"inductive\" definition, is one that defines a word in terms of itself, so to speak, albeit in a useful way. Normally this consists of three steps:\nFor instance, we could define a natural number as follows (after Peano): \nSo \"0\" will have exactly one successor, which for convenience can be called \"1\". In turn, \"1\" will have exactly one successor, which could be called \"2\", and so on. Notice that the second condition in the definition itself refers to natural numbers, and hence involves self-reference. Although this sort of definition involves a form of circularity, it is not vicious, and the definition has been quite successful.\nIn the same way, we can define ancestor as follows:\nOr simply: an ancestor is a parent or a parent of an ancestor.\nIn medicine.\nIn medical dictionaries, guidelines and other consensus statements and classifications, definitions should as far as possible be:\nIssues with definitions.\nCertain rules have traditionally been given for definitions (in particular, genus-differentia definitions).\nLimitations of definition.\nGiven that a natural language such as English contains, at any given time, a finite number of words, any comprehensive list of definitions must either be circular or rely upon primitive notions. If every term of every \"definiens\" must itself be defined, \"where at last should we stop?\" A dictionary, for instance, insofar as it is a comprehensive list of lexical definitions, must resort to circularity.\nMany philosophers have chosen instead to leave some terms undefined. The scholastic philosophers claimed that the highest genera (called the ten \"generalissima\") cannot be defined, since a higher genus cannot be assigned under which they may fall. Thus being, unity and similar concepts cannot be defined. Locke supposes in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" that the names of simple concepts do not admit of any definition. More recently Bertrand Russell sought to develop a formal language based on logical atoms. Other philosophers, notably Wittgenstein, rejected the need for any undefined simples. Wittgenstein pointed out in his \"Philosophical Investigations\" that what counts as a \"simple\" in one circumstance might not do so in another. He rejected the very idea that every explanation of the meaning of a term needed itself to be explained: \"As though an explanation hung in the air unless supported by another one\", claiming instead that explanation of a term is only needed to avoid misunderstanding.\nLocke and Mill also argued that individuals cannot be defined. Names are learned by connecting an idea with a sound, so that speaker and hearer have the same idea when the same word is used. This is not possible when no one else is acquainted with the particular thing that has \"fallen under our notice\". Russell offered his theory of descriptions in part as a way of defining a proper name, the definition being given by a definite description that \"picks out\" exactly one individual. Saul Kripke pointed to difficulties with this approach, especially in relation to modality, in his book \"Naming and Necessity\".\nThere is a presumption in the classic example of a definition that the \"definiens\" can be stated. Wittgenstein argued that for some terms this is not the case. The examples he used include \"game\", \"number\" and \"family\". In such cases, he argued, there is no fixed boundary that can be used to provide a definition. Rather, the items are grouped together because of a family resemblance. For terms such as these it is not possible and indeed not necessary to state a definition; rather, one simply comes to understand the \"use\" of the term."}
{"id": "7965", "revid": "937705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7965", "title": "Disruption", "text": "Disruption, disruptive, or disrupted may refer to:"}
